  
The White House
  January 18, 2017
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the World Economic Forum
As Prepared for delivery:
Ladies and gentlemen, it’s a great honor to once again address this distinguished forum.
But this year, in these early days of 2017, there’s a palpable uncertainty about the state of our world.
For the members of the media in the audience, I want to make it clear that I am not referring to the imminent transition of power in my country.
In two days, there will be a new President of the United States, but the challenges we face and the choices we must make as an international community do not hinge exclusively on Washington’s leadership.
Whether we reinforce the ties that bind us, or whether we unravel under current pressures— those choices must be made in every nation, and they will determine what kind of world we leave to our children.
For the past seven decades, the choices we have made— particularly the United States and our Allies in Europe— have steered our world down a clear path.
After World War II, we drew a line under centuries of conflict and took steps to bend the arc of history in a more just direction. Instead of resigning ourselves to ceaseless wars, we built institutions and alliances to advance our shared security.
Instead of punishing former enemies, we invested billions in helping them rebuild.
Instead of sorting the world into winners and losers, we outlined universal values that defined a better future for all our children.
Our careful attention to building and sustaining a liberal international order—with the United States and Europe at its core—was the bedrock of the success the world enjoyed in the second half of the 20th Century
An era of expanding liberty.
Unprecedented economic growth that lifted millions out of poverty.
A community of democracies that—to this day— serves as the fulcrum for our common security and for our capacity to address the world’s most pressing challenges.
Strengthening these values— values that have served our community of nations so well, for so long—is paramount to retaining the position of leadership Western nations enjoy and preserving the progress we have made together.
Strengthening these values— values that have served our community of nations so well, for so long—is paramount to retaining the position of leadership Western nations enjoy and preserving the progress we have made together.
Today, I’d like to speak to the sources of those pressures, and about why it is imperative that we act urgently to defend the liberal international order.
Here in this exclusive Alpine tower, where CEOs of multinational corporations rub elbows with leaders of nations, it is easy to embrace the intellectual benefits of a more open and integrated world.
The concern mothers and fathers feel about losing the factory job that has always allowed them to provide for their families.
Parents who don’t believe that they can give their children a better life than the one they have.
These are the pressures that are undermining support for the liberal international order from the inside.
Globalization has not been an unalloyed good.
It has deepened the rift between those racing ahead at the top and those struggling to hang on in the middle, or falling to the bottom.
One year ago, I spoke here in Davos about the challenges we face in mastering this fourth industrial revolution— about how we can ensure that the benefits and the burdens of globalization and digitization are shared more equitably.
In my country, there used to be a basic bargain, embraced by both major political parties. It was something everyone agreed on.
If you contributed to the success of the enterprise, you shared in the profits. Today that bargain is fractured.
Advanced technology has divorced productivity from labor—meaning we’re making more than ever, but with fewer workers.
There’s a shrinking demand for low-skill laborers, while highly-educated workers are getting paid more and more—contributing to rising inequality.
International trade and greater economic integration has lifted millions of people in the developing world out of abject poverty—improving education, extending life expectancies, opening new opportunities.
Standards of living are still well below middle class expectations in the United States and Europe, but the change is real.
Meanwhile, for many communities in the developed world that have long depended on manufacturing, the opposite is true.
Their relative standard of living has declined. They feel shut out of opportunities. And their economic security feels jeopardized.
Taken together, these forces are effectively hollowing out the middle class—the traditional engine of economic growth and social stability in Western nations.
We cannot undo the changes technology has wrought in our world—nor should we try.
But we can and we must take action to mitigate the economic trends that are stoking unrest in so many advanced economies and undermining people’s basic sense of dignity.
Our goal should be a world where everyone’s standard of living can rise together.
There’s an urgency to taking common sense steps like:
increasing cognitive capabilities through access to education and job training. Ensuring basic protections for workers. Expanding access to capital. And implementing a progressive, equitable tax system where everyone pays their fair share.
(Pause)
Compounding these economic worries are people’s fears about the very real security risks we face.
If you look at the long sweep of history, or even just the trend lines in wars and other incidents of large-scale violence over the past 50, 60, 70 years— as a practical matter, we are probably safer than ever.
But it doesn’t feel that way.
Daily images of violence and unrest from all over the world are shared directly on our televisions and smart phones— images we rarely would have seen in a pre-digital age.
It’s fostered a feeling of perpetual chaos— of being overrun by outside forces.
Communication technologies have fostered incredible progress— making information more open and accessible, breaking down the barriers between people and nations, facilitating greater scientific collaboration, empowering ordinary citizens to challenge injustice and hold their governments accountable.
But they have also given hateful individuals a megaphone to spread their virulent, extremist ideologies.
Radical jihadists not only recruit and find haven in the ungoverned desserts of Iraq and Syria— they do the same in the ungoverned spaces of the Internet.
Borders seem less real. Terrorist attacks feel inescapable. Fears about unrelenting migration mount as people continue to flee violence and deprivation in their homelands.
And in the wake of these understandable fears, we have seen a series of alarming responses.
Popular movements on both the left and the right have demonstrated a dangerous willingness to revert to political small-mindedness—to the same nationalist, protectionist, and isolationist agendas that led the world to consume itself in war during in the last century.
As we have seen time and again throughout history, demagogues and autocrats have emerged— seeking to capitalize on people’s insecurities.
In this case, using Islamophobic, anti-Semitic, or xenophobic rhetoric to stoke fear, sow division, and advance their own narrow agendas.
This is a politics at odds with our values and with the vision that built—and sustains—the liberal international order.
The impulse to hunker down, shut the gates, build walls, and exit at this moment is precisely the wrong answer.
It offers a false sense of security in an interconnected world.
It will not resolve the root causes of these fears— and it risks eroding from the inside out the foundations of the very system that spawned the West’s historically unprecedented success.
We need to tap into the— big-heartedness that conceived a Marshall Plan, the foresight that planned a Bretton Woods, the audacity that proposed a United Nations.
We cannot rout fear with retrenchment. Rather, this is the moment to lead boldly and recommit ourselves to our common principles—which remain essential to my nation, and to liberal democracies the world over. Of course, there are those who do not share this vision for the world.
Those who wish to dissolve the community of democracies and our supporting institutions in favor of a more parochial international order—where power rules and spheres of influence lock in divides among nations.
We see this in Asia and the Middle East— where China and Iran would clearly prefer a world in which they hold sway in their regions. But I will not mince words. This movement is principally led by Russia.
Under President Putin, Russia is working with every tool available to them to whittle away at the edges of the European project, test for fault lines among western nations, and return to a politics defined by spheres of influence.
We see it in their aggression against their neighbors. Sending so-called “little green men” across the border to stir violence and strains of separatism in Ukraine. Using energy as a weapon—cutting off gas supplies mid-winter, raising prices to manipulate nations to act in Russia’s interests. Using corruption to empower oligarchs and coerce politicians.
We see it in their worldwide use of propaganda and false information campaigns: Injecting doubt and political agitation into democratic systems. Strengthening illiberal factions, on both the left and the right, that seek to roll back decades of progress from within our systems.
We even saw it in the cyber intrusions against political parties and individuals in the United States— which our intelligence community has determined with high confidence were specifically motivated to influence our elections.
But it’s not only the United States that has been targeted. Europe has seen the same kind of attacks in the past.
And with many countries in Europe slated to hold elections this year, we should expect further attempts by Russia to meddle in the democratic process.
Again, their purpose is clear— to collapse the liberal international order. Simply put, Russia has a different vision for the future, which they are pursuing across the board.
They seek a return to a world where the strong impose their will through military might, corruption, or criminality—while weaker neighbors fall in line.
And from the first moments of our Administration— even as we sought a reset with then-President Medvedev— President Obama and I have made it clear that this is no way for nations to behave in the 21st Century.
When I addressed the Munich Security Conference in February of 2009, I said:
“We will not recognize any nation having a sphere of influence. It will remain our view that sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances.”
That’s been our position throughout the past eight years, and it is a position we must all continue championing in the years ahead.
The United States has not always been the perfect guardian of our order.
We have not always lived up to our own values— and some of our past missteps provided fodder for the forces of illiberalism.
But President Obama and I have worked consistently over the past eight years to lead not only by the example of our power—but by the power of our example.
And this is the challenge that will—by necessity— define the foreign policy agendas of all our nations as we move forward.
So although I will only be the Vice President of the United States for 48 more hours— I am here today to issue a call to action.
We cannot wait for others to write the future they hope to see.
The United States and Europe must lead the fight to defend those values that have brought us to where we are today.
Fight to create more equitable and more inclusive growth for people at every level.
Fight for democracy wherever it is under threat— be it at home or abroad.
Fight to lift up the forces of inclusivity while opposing intolerance in all its guises.
Fight the urge to embrace isolationism and protectionism.
Fight back against the dangerous proposition that facts no longer matter.
That the truth holds no inherent power in a world where propagandists, demagogues, and extremists carry sway.
To win this fight, we must continue to invest in our democratic alliances.
As it as has been for seven decades, the unity of our transatlantic connection is essential to addressing global challenges.
Defending the liberal international order requires that we resist the forces of European disintegration and maintain our long-standing insistence on a Europe whole, free and at peace.
That means fighting for the European Union—one of the most vibrant and consequential institutions on earth
The EU has contributed to the prosperity of millions—fueling reforms that have improved living standards and driving the peaceful resolution of disputes between nations.
That means keeping open the door for membership in European and transatlantic institutions to those states on Europe’s eastern edge—where people in places like the Balkans and Ukraine continue to strive to be part of the incredible undertaking that is the European Union.
The EU has been an indispensable partner to the United States—and as the EU and the UK begin to navigate a new relationship, it remains profoundly in America’s interest to maintain our close relationships with both parties.
All of our peoples are safer when we work together.
We must continue to stand up for those basic norms of modern nations—the principles of territorial integrity, freedom of navigation, and national sovereignty.
The right of all nations “to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances.”
To that end—we must: bolster Europe’s energy independence so that nations are not subject to outside manipulations; improve our cyber defenses; and combat misinformation to prevent outsiders from perverting our democratic processes.
And the single greatest bulwark for our transatlantic partnership is the unshakable commitment of the United States to all our NATO Allies.
An attack on one is an attack on all. That can never be called into question. And we must continue to stand with Ukraine as they resist Russia’s acts of aggression and pursue their European path.
In two days, the United States will engage in the act that has defined our exceptional democracy for more than 200 years—the peaceful transition of power from one leader, and one political party, to another.
And it is my hope and expectation that the next President and Vice President, and our leaders in Congress, will ensure that the United States continues to fulfill our historic responsibility as the indispensable nation.
But we have never been able to lead alone— not after World War II, not during the depths of the Cold War, and not today.
The United States, our NATO allies, all the nations of Europe—we are in this together. As the oldest and the strongest democracies in the world, we have a responsibility to beat back the challenges at our door.
We must never forget how we got here. Or take for granted that our success will continue.
It is only by championing the liberal international order— by continuing to invest in our security, reaffirming our shared values, and expanding the cause of liberty around the world—that will retain our position of leadership.
Because if we don’t fight for our values, no one else will.
The idea of Europe whole, free, and at peace— in my opinion—constitutes one of the most audacious and consequential visions of the past century.
The notion that after centuries of conflict, Europe could reinvent itself as an integrated community— one committed to political solidarity, the free flow of goods and people, and a solemn obligation to collective defense—and succeed in achieving it.
The United States believed in it. Peoples across Europe believed in it—aspired to it.
And you did it.
The success of the European enterprise was essential to America’s security in the 20th Century— and it remains so today.
You’ve heard me make this case for four decades. But I am not alone in this belief. America’s commitment to Europe and NATO is thoroughly bipartisan.
Just last month, my good friend and frequent sparring partner, Republican Senator John McCain traveled to Estonia where he said: “The best way to prevent Russian misbehavior [is] by having a credible, strong military and a strong NATO alliance.”
On the same trip, another leading Republican Senator, Lindsey Graham, assured Ukrainian troops serving on the frontline: “Your fight is our fight.”
That’s the same sentiment I expressed two days ago, when I made my sixth trip to Ukraine as Vice President.
History has proven that the defense of free nations in Europe has always been America’s fight— and the foundation of our security.
Throughout more than four decades of incredibly divisive foreign policy debates, there has always been a consensus about the value of the transatlantic relationship.
That will not change.
And as I re-enter private life, I want to assure you today that I will stand with you as you carry this fight forward.
I will continue to use my voice and my power as a citizen—doing whatever I can to keep our transatlantic alliance strong and vibrant—because our common future depends upon it.
Thank you.
    
The White House
  January 17, 2017
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on The Cancer Moonshot
World Economic Forum
Davos, Switzerland
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Madam Ambassador, thanks for putting together a crowd for us.  (Laughter.) 
Folks, I’m delighted to be here and happy to be back with so many distinguished people.  And I mean that sincerely.  Many of you know as much or more about the subjects I’m going to speak to than I do, including -- is Elizabeth Blackburn here?  Elizabeth, a Nobel Laureate, who found the BRCA gene.  As that old saying goes, she’s forgotten more about this than I’m going to know.
But, folks, I’m happy to be back here at the World Economic Forum at Davos to talk about the fight against cancer.  And I’m accompanied by Greg Simon, who is Executive Director of administration’s Cancer Moonshot and who will lead my Biden Cancer Initiative that I’ll launch after we leave office, which is in about 48 hours.  (Laughter.)  I hope I have a ride home.  (Laughter.)  I’ll talk about in a few moments.
But, Greg, where are you?  Greg has had a great deal of experience in this area and he’s led the initiative the last year for the President and me.
Last year, I arrived at the forum a few days after President Obama delivered his final State of the Union Address, where he announced, quite frankly to my surprise, that he was putting me in charge of a national Cancer Moonshot to double the rate of progress in preventing, diagnosing and treating cancer.
And I was not only genuinely surprised by the announcement, I was genuinely surprised by the response that I got both at home and abroad.  Here at Davos I was scheduled -- Klaus had asked me to deliver the keynote address on the promise and perils of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution, and to participate in a few bilateral meetings over the remaining days.
But given the overwhelming interest in the Cancer Moonshot, the forum asked  me if I could quickly convene a roundtable of cancer experts, among whom Elizabeth was one of them, to discuss where we are and where we need to go in the fight against cancer.
And so I did on a few days notice -- we put together such a roundtable -- and it kicked off what for me was a year-long journey that’s taken me literally around the world meeting with the best cancer researchers, doctors, nurses, and patients, as well as philanthropists, heads of state -- they've all been part of it. 
But I’m back here today to outline how far we’ve come and what -- at least from our perspective -- what path we should chart moving forward.
And let me start with where we believe we are.  When we announced the Cancer Moonshot, I knew there would be a lot of skeptics out there who’d say, “well, here we go again. Haven’t we done this before?”  
President Nixon, when he declared War on Cancer in 1971, he was earnest and sincere and very committed.  But what makes the difference between then and now is -- the single big difference is that he had no army.  He had no resources.  He had no weapons.  He had no strategy to win.  
But after 45 years with many of you in this room doing incredible work, 45 years of progress, after decades of funding research, training scientists and physicians, treating millions of patients, we now have an army.  We now have powerful new technologies and tools, like:  Immunotherapy that -- by the way, even six, eight, 10 years ago was viewed kind of as a voodoo science out there.  It wasn’t really an integral part of this fight -- that makes cancer cells visible to the immune system so our natural defenses can destroy the cancer. 
Surgeons are using cutting-edge robotics to allow for more precise imaging to find the cancer and more precisely surgically remove the cancer in hard-to-reach areas.
Liquid biopsies that find early signs of cancer in the blood and tell you whether or not you have a particular cancer.    
These advances and many others provide hope that more precise medicines and diagnostics might greatly improve and detect and defeat cancer.  
But on so many levels, we’ve now reached an inflection point.  When the system was set up before, we thought there was basically only one cancer in different parts of the body.  We’ve now learned there are over 200 specific kinds of cancers.
After decades we thought we could tackle cancer one discipline at a time.  But that's not how cancer operates.  Cancer uses every tool at its disposal -- it hides from the immune system, it builds it own blood supply system, it uses viruses to spread, it engineers a friendlier environment, a cellular environment in which to survive.
And it knows how to spread through the body using pathways and mutations we don’t understand fully yet.  And cancer never gives up, it never surrenders.  That's why we have to use every discipline cancer does, and that's what we’re starting to in a way that's only really begun in the last five or six, seven years.
Five years ago as I said, oncologists weren’t routinely working closely with immunologists, virologists, geneticists, chemical and biological engineers.  And now they are. 
Immunotherapies are finding the keys to making cancer cells visible and targeting them.  Virologist are now working on vaccines to prevent and treat cancers. Geneticists are cataloging mutations that drive cancers.  And chemical and biological engineers are helping engineer environments hostile to cancer.  And they’re all working together.
Like many of you, I decided to become acquainted with this after someone close to me in my family was diagnosed.  You tend to try to learn everything you possibly can once that occurs.  And I knew little about the discipline.  And like I said, what impressed me was that so much of this is really very brand new in terms of the collaboration.  
Also, there’s a recognition that by aggregating and sharing millions of patients’ data, like genomics, family history, lifestyles, treatment outcomes and by using supercomputing power that we can do now a million billion calculations a second, we can understand why one therapy or treatment works for one person and not for another for the same exact cancer.
And today, it was just announced that two major data sharing organizations, who were part of the roundtable.  Five of them were here when we had the roundtable last year, two of them -- Cancer LinQ and another that focuses on genomic information called Project Genie -- are joining forces to accelerate data sharing of real-world clinical data that will improve cancers.
After the meeting we had here, I asked the five groups that we're focusing on data sharing -- on aggregating data, I asked them whether they’d meet with me in Washington privately.  And they came to my office, and we sat for an hour and a half.  And I asked each of them to explain to me -- help educate me as to what they were doing.  And I remember when we finished saying something that will not surprise you all, but you said, didn't you know that, Joe?  I looked and said, but it sounds like you're all doing the same thing.  No, I’m not being facetious.  I said, you've all just made the case to me the more data you can aggregate across a spectrum, the more likely you are to find patterns, the most likely you are to find cures and/or treatments.  Why aren’t you talking to one another? 
And I remember afterwards several of them walking up to me as we were having coffee and pulling me aside and say, keep this up.  Keep this up.  But I didn't -- I had nothing to do with this sharing and collaboration.  But the point is the mood is changing as I feel it just in the last year.
I also learned from the best minds in the world that the strategy we’ve been following is equivalent to fighting the last war.  The model of scientific breakthroughs for most of the history was one of individual achievement, Jonas Salk in the laboratory finding the -- creating the polio vaccine.  There was little -- if any -- sharing among hospitals and researchers, and little ability to share even if they wanted to share. 
And across the world, our funding processes and systems of academic research primarily follow that old model.  So the Moonshot has fundamentally been about two things since I began it.  And the first objective I’ve had was to inject the urgency of now into this fight and double the rate of progress and do in five years instead of 10.
And when I say urgency of now, the brightest minds I’ve met in the world -- and I’ve been doing my job and mostly working on strategic doctrine and foreign policy my career -- the brightest people I’ve met, I’ve met now and spoken with over 13,000 cancer researchers in the two major organizations.  I’ve met with scores and scores of leaders in the field.  I’ve met with seven or eight Nobel Laureates in the field.  And the amazing thing to me is that they're all working so hard.  But with a few changes, even without learning more information, we could probably extend the life of a lot of people.
The one thing that the clinicians can tell you is -- and those of you who are clinicians -- how many times have you had a patient say to you, Doctor, can you just -- I know you can't save me, but can you just give me two more weeks so I can watch her get married, doc?  Doc, can you just keep me around for another month so I can see my first grandchild born, doc?  Doc, I’m not asking for anything except can you just extend a little bit?  I might be able to get my finances in order.  
You hear that all the time.  I heard that at my son’s beside.  He wasn’t afraid of dying, but he wanted to settle a few things.  Greater collaboration with no new breakthroughs can have the possibility of being able to say to one in four or five of those patients, yes, I can figure a way, just a little longer.
The second thing, objective I had was changing the culture, coming up with a new strategy for this fight.  Not for the strategy for the last fight.
We have four primary structures for organizing the Moonshot.  One, we established the White House Cancer Moonshot Task Force to reimagine the federal government’s fight and role in this fight to break down silos in the federal government.  I went all over the world literally asking for suggestions:  What should we be doing better?
Under this task force, which I engaged and Greg met with members of each of the departments at least once every two weeks for updates on progress that was being made on things we were trying to do, we engaged everyone from the National Institutes of Health, to the Defense Department and to Veterans Affairs -- but to some agencies never been involved.  NASA -- everybody would go why in the hell are they bringing NASA into this, or the Patent Office, or the Environmental Protection Agency, or the White House policy councils, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the Office of Management and Budget, they all have a role to play.   
Secondly, we hosted a Cancer Moonshot Summit in June.  Some of you participated in that summit.  We held it in D.C., over 400 of you came.  We had roundtables on various aspects of dealing with cancer.  Some of you were there, made significant contributions.  But interestingly enough, we simulcast, in effect, these roundtables where 7,000 people around the country gathered in 300 local summits held in every single state, including Guam and Puerto Rico to try to again inject this notion of the urgency of now.
And the summit workshops launched a torrent of new collaborations and innovative initiatives across all sectors, and they continue to this day.
For example, we got a call from IBM.  How would you like to borrow Watson?  They came to us and offered Watson, their supercomputer, to partner with the largest hospital in the world, the Department of Defense and the Veterans Affairs.  So now a veteran can get her genome or tumor sequenced at Walter Reed, and they're very good at it and they can do it quickly, and then Watson will search all specific therapies that would target that particular cancer and provide recommendations to the physicians and tumor boards to use in choosing the right therapy.  So you increase the prospect that the first time out will be the best shot out.
In June, I was at the University of Chicago, where we launched the National Cancer Institute Genomic Data Commons.  The purpose was to bring together cancer sequencing data and related patient information from the Cancer Genome Atlas.  Well, that atlas comprised roughly 14,000 individuals with that data.  Now the database has grown now to over 30,000 individuals.  And our international agreements are going to add tens of thousands of more patients’ data.
And Amazon came along and says, look, we’ll agree to make their cloud computing available to help us store these enormous amounts of data that this project is going to generate.
But the important thing is, that it’s a totally open-access database, able to be accessed by any researcher in the world, eliminating the silos.  It did not exist a year ago.  And this data has already been accessed and used more than 5 million times, and this was in the spring of last year -- increasing chances exponentially that we may find some answers. 
We’ve also transformed access to cancer clinical trials.  In the United States only 4 percent of the people diagnosed with cancer ever become part of a clinical trial, which is how research advances and may be the only possibility of saving the patient’s life.  Maybe.
So we engaged the President’s Innovation Fellows, some of the top, young technology minds in the world, mostly from Silicon Valley, who have dedicated a year to come in.  These are trying to modernize the whole government.  So I went to them and said, look, there’s no way anyone can rationally go and figure out that that oncologist from Bemidji, Minnesota, who has come up with an accurate diagnosis doesn't know where to turn.  He’s not near one of the great cancer centers in the United States.  So where do they go?
There was a site that said you could click on and find out where there were cancer trials.  But it was useless.  So these brilliant, young -- they range in age from 25 to 40 thereabouts -- within three weeks put together a site.  They can go now.  It’s trials.cancer.gov.  Type in real words like breast cancer, leukemia, and ZIP codes, age, and then find a list of clinical trials near you or your loved one that previously you could not have easily found.  And find the people equally excited about this are the pharmaceutical companies.  They have trouble finding enough people for their trials.
You and your doctor can now find out what trials are available for your types of cancer near you. 
Another example is NASA I mentioned earlier, working with the National Cancer Institute, establishing a new collaboration to study the biological effects of particle beam radiotherapy, a novel technology that may deliver a more targeted dose of radiation to tumor cells.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is advancing the effort to promote cancer vaccines like the HPV vaccine that are safe and effective strategies for combatting viruses -- for various types of cancer.
The Moonshot also initiated the Blood Profiling Atlas Pilot. Representatives from the government, academia, and pharmaceutical and diagnostic companies are launching partnerships to create an open database for liquid biopsies to accelerate the development of safe and effective blood profiling diagnostic technologies and our patient will benefit from this.
Stanford Medicine and the VA in Palo Alto are collaborating to establish the Hadron Center in Palo Alto, California, for the potential benefit of both Veteran and non-Veteran cancer patients. 
The Hadron Center will utilize particle-beam radiotherapy using beams of charged particles such as proton and helium, carbon, or other ions to allow more precise targeting everywhere inside the patient's body, potentially -- we don't know yet -- resulting in less damage to healthy cells.
The reason NASA got in the game is they know more about radiation than anybody in the world, so they're participating.  
Earlier this year we announced what we call the NCI -- the National Cancer Institute Formulary. This is a public-private partnership with more than two dozen pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies which allows researchers to test existing drugs for new combinations that could be effective against different types of cancer. 
This is how it works.  When you go into a bar and you listen to a song and you put money in a jukebox, you don’t have to negotiate a licensing agreement with each song from the record company you're about to play.  That licensing agreement has already been worked out.
But until recently, if you waited to use -- you've wanted to use a combination of drug, you had to go through each company, get permission to use each different drug.  It literally could take years.  And a lot of people got lost in the meantime that might have been saved. 
Now, the NCI has already worked out the details of intellectual property, access, and licensing so researchers and companies know there is an agreement on licensing if the drug is successful and how the intellectual property will be shared. 
This new system just launched.  And I urge as many of you as possible to join it, participate, and share.  It will make an enormous difference potentially.
Combination drugs have the potential to do for cancers what many of you have done for HIV.  There was total collaboration in HIV. 
There are dozens of other actions that you can read about in WhiteHouse.gov/CancerMoonshot. 
The third thing we did was we created a Cancer Moonshot blue ribbon panel at our national institute to recommend research that holds the most promise for additional investments.  Some of you were named to that panel.  My dad used to have an expression.  He said, Joey, if everything is equally important to you, nothing is important to you.  What do the best minds in the world think are the best therapies or technologies we should be pursuing as rapidly as we can, in what order?  
That blue ribbon panel delivered a report with transformative recommendations to change the research blueprint for the National Cancer Institute.
For example:  Launching a 3-D Cancer Atlas.  Oncologists today rely on past experience, consultation with multidisciplinary teams, published studies, and other sources to make diagnosis and treatment decisions. 
But providing a web-based catalog of the genetic lesions and cellular interactions in a tumor, immune and other cells in the tumor, the microenvironment -- one that maps the evolution of tumor -- from development to metastasis, it’s going to enable researchers to develop predictive models for tumor progression and response to treatment that will ultimately help oncologists make informed treatment decisions for each patient
Now none of this is a guaranteed promise.  But it all holds significant potential.  Establishing a national network of cancer patients that, with appropriate privacy safeguards, will provide them with a genetic profile of their own cancer and let them “pre-register” for clinical trials, so they can be contacted when a trial in which they may be eligible opens; establishing clinical trials networks devoted exclusively to immunotherapies for pediatric and adult cancers would advance research in this area and could lead to new vaccines to prevent cancers of all types in children, as well as adults; expanding the use of proven cancer prevention and early detection strategies.  
Several cancer prevention and risk reduction strategies have proven to be highly effective, including tobacco control, colorectal cancer screening, HPV vaccine. 
Boosting prevention research to identify ways to increase the uptake of these strategies, especially in medically underserved populations could greatly reduce the incidence and death from lung and other tobacco-related cancers, colorectal cancer, cervical and other HPV-related cancers, respectively. 
Here’s why it matters.  By some estimates, at least 50 percent of the cancers can be prevented, and that prevention falls into three major categories: 
One:  Personal actions on the part of the individual, such as living a healthier lifestyle, avoiding cancer risk behaviors, like smoking.
The second way of prevention is the responsibilities of government and industry to reduce carcinogens and toxins in the air we breathe, the water we drink, the soil we grow our food in. 
And the third is to make available existing diagnostic tools to all communities -- because we know the earlier cancer is detected, the better prospect for an outcome that's good.
But there is a fourth outcome, an entirely new set of diagnostic tools that can detect cancers earlier, new technologies like hereditary markers.  Instead of waiting until you're 48 years old to get your first colonoscopy, if they have the marker, get it when you're 16 years old. 
And by continuing to keep an eye on it, prevent you from being the victim of dying of cancer -- of that cancer.
The fourth -- and in addition to the task force report, I was asked to deliver a report to the President in October that included the progress made ‘16 and my assessment -- and it’s only mine of what the road ahead looks like.  Obviously, I would like you all to look at that and critique it. 
The report lays out the changes we need in our view to implement -- to implement at our research institutions and universities to align our research system with the realities and opportunities of the 21st century.  
And all this has helped us make progress on the international fight against cancer.  
Last April I delivered remarks at conference on Regenerative Medicine hosted by the Vatican and that the Pope addressed as well.  I laid out what I thought to be the guideposts for international collaboration through the Moonshot.
One:  Focus on prevention, access, and affordability around the world.
Two:  Raise the urgency of international response to cancer, reflecting the same urgency we bring to infectious disease threats.  There are 16 Million people who will die from cancer this year.  And according to many of the experts in the audience, if we don’t do anything about it, there will be 26 million dying by 2020.
Increase research and patient data sharing among researchers, institutions, foundations, nations.  Support standardization of data and biorepositories.  Increase government investment and cancer research -- we should increase it to capitalize on this moment, of this inflection point.
Since then, the United States has signed 10 memoranda of understanding in nine countries.   I’m supposedly an expert on foreign policy.  An expert is anyone from out of town with a briefcase.  (Laughter.)  I have traveled over 1.3 million miles for the President, meeting with heads of state, most of whom I’ve known most of my career.  I was recently in the Gulf, the Persian Gulf recently, seven months ago, talking about the fight against ISIS with a head of state, sitting on the Gulf, the Persian Gulf, talking about -- he had his people lined up on one side of a table outside and I had mine for a dinner.  And before we began, he said, Mr. Vice President, before we talk about ISIS -- they call it Daesh -- before we talk about Daesh, can we talk about cancer?  We want to help.
In that tour through the Middle East in Jordan and Israel, can we talk about cancer?  
The President put together and 50 heads of state came in the East Room with rectangular tables lined up around the entire room with 50 heads of state on how to deal with the nuclear proliferation.  The President sat in front of the fireplace.  And I was directly across from him, my back to that famous hallway.  Before he began he said, I know a lot of you want to talk to Joe about cancer, but let’s deal with the nuclear issue first.  (Laughter.)  He wasn’t being facetious.  The result -- whether I was in Melbourne, Japan, the UAE, we've signed -- we were sought after and signed 10 detailed memorandum of understanding as to how we should jointly proceed.
These have focused on data sharing and advanced research. 
Last month, we saw the United States Congress come together.  I know I’m supposedly the guy that Republicans and Democrats like in the Congress.  I actually respect the Congress.  That's part of the problem that people think I have.  But I genuinely do.  And we could get anything through the Congress.
But through the leadership of some Republicans in the House and Democrats in the Senate, they put together what they call the 21st Century Cures Act, and no one thought we could pass it.  At the very waning hours, we were able to go up and get them jointly to appropriate and commit to 6.3 billion in biomedical and health-related research, including $1.8 billion for the National Cancer Institute to invest in additional research as part of the Moonshot.  This is the one bipartisan thing that exists, and I pray will continue to exist in the new administration. 
But it also is an international consensus.  So we have enormous opportunities I believe with greater collaboration, but organizing a different pathway than we've been following.
This investment, in my view, should be matched by other nations who agree that now is the time to double-down in our fight against cancer.  And it’s my hope, as I’ve already spoken to the Vice President-elect, who is a good man, about to come in to be Vice President in four days or three days, about my willingness to continue to work with him and the incoming administration to be committed and enthusiastic as we are to the goal of ending cancer as we know it.  And my prayer is they will do that, as well. 
But I know those in the private sector, philanthropy, at academic institutions and non-profit organizations, will continue the work regardless of what the next administration does.  There’s too much momentum here.  And this will include me as a private citizen.  
I do not have -- I hope I’m well informed, but I don't have the expertise most of you have, but I’ve found I have the power to convene and thus far I’ve been viewed as a fair dealer.  I have no interest in any one institution or another.  And I maybe even have the ability to occasionally shame so people move in directions that up to now there’s been unwillingness to move because of the culture that's developed.
After I leave office, after meeting with some very significant people who many of you know -- a coupe in this room as well -- who have encouraged me to set up the Biden Cancer Initiative with similar goals of the Moonshot, changing the way we do business in cancer research and development and providing cancer care.
The initiative will focus on, one, improving data standards and giving patients a mechanism to share their data, so they can help many other patients going through the same fight; and so researchers can use the data to find new patients and new cures.  Most people are not experts like you.  They think that already exists, that patients actually own their own data; that people -- they actually have access to their own data.  I was with one particular researcher, and he said, well, we're having trouble getting patients.  And I said, I tell you what, I’ll make you a bet -- the press was with me, like here -- I said, I bet if I ask them, their networks will give me 15 minutes of primetime to talk about this.  I said, if I pick one single repository, I’ll bet you I get minimum between 2 million and 10 million patients who the next morning will give you their data, say they’ll send it there.  And this researcher said, well, yes, maybe you have a point.  
Guys, this is not -- this is within our wheelhouse.  That's the easy part.  The hard part is what you all do.
Working with community care organizations to help improve access to care and quality of care is another focus that we'll have.  So outcomes aren’t wholly dictated by your ZIP code.
And convening a national conversation with pharmaceutical companies, insurers, biotech companies, and others to ensure patients can afford treatments.  Too many Americans are forced to sell their homes, go into bankruptcy, just so a loved one can get the care and hope for the cure.  That needs to change.
And these companies need to have serious remuneration.  They're taking real risks.  But there’s got to be a way we can figure this out.
And also calling for greater transparency and access to clinical trials, so more patients can get access to treatments that might work for their cancer.
And continuing to work for cultural change and improvements in our cancer research system, so we can make the best use of today’s opportunities to generate, share and knowledge from patients and researchers to help patients everywhere around the world. 
These are the reasons why I plan on staying involved -- because for the first time in 45 years, there is some real movement toward collaboration.  Not because people are selfish, but because it wasn’t the model.  It’s not the way it worked for good reason.  But the collaboration between cancer centers, drug companies, the insurance industry, and government is where the solution lies -- and how we’ll end cancer as we know it. 
So let me conclude by saying, which will not shock you:  I am optimistic.  (Laughter.)  I know I’m always optimistic.  But I am optimistic because of the absolute commitment and sheer brilliance I have been exposed to from so many researchers and scientists and these great institutions.
I see the day when patients get the right therapy the first time for their cancer, where prevention is more effective, and
where care is personalized and more effective with less harmful side effects.
I see the day when those younger people of you in this room, when you take your children and grandchildren later for their school physical, that they will -- at the time they get their vaccination against measles and mumps, they’ll be vaccinated against certain types of cancer -- like you can be vaccinated against HPV virus.
I see the day when we’ll be able to identify through markers in the blood, cancers that haven’t even developed yet. 
And the one thing I can tell you:  There is hope. 
I’m willing to bet everyone in this room who has had cancer, or has a loved one who has had cancer, you understand that feeling when the doctor says, it’s cancer. 
You all know, at that moment, the one thing you most need is some reason to hope. 
When President Kennedy discussed sending humankind to the moon, he talked about the commitment the nation -- and this is the phrase he used -- the commitment the nation was “unwilling to postpone.”
A very famous speech, and some of you can probably recite the speech, but the part of the speech since I’ve been a kid that got me the most about my notion about governance, my notion about exploration, my notion about science was when a nation or a people “unwilling to postpone.”  We should be unwilling to postpone finding the answer to how to end cancer as we know it.
And I’m confident we can do it.  You're already doing it.  But let’s double down.  It is about the urgency of now.
I thank you all for your graciousness in listening and thank you for having me.  (Applause.) 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 17, 2017
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden With Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko
Bankova
Kyiv, Ukraine
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. President, I may have to call you once every couple weeks just to hear your voice.  (Laughter.)  This has been going on a long time.
Good afternoon, everyone.  It’s a great, pleasure to be once more here in Kyiv to reaffirm the depth of the partnership between our two peoples.  This is my sixth visit to Ukraine as Vice President and my fifth in the year since the Revolution of Dignity on the Maidan, which was an astounding thing to witness when so many Ukrainian patriots stood up and demanded a future that this country has been too long denied.
And I wanted to come here one more time on my last trip as Vice President to honor how much progress the people of Ukraine have achieved.  This year marks the 25th year since Ukraine gained its independence.  And the United States has been there to support and help you at every step of the way.  Our partnership has spanned four different American Presidents from across our political spectrum.  It has deep roots in both the Republican and Democratic parties.
As you saw a few weeks ago when two of my good friends from “the other side” -- former Senate colleagues John McCain and Lindsey Graham and Amy Klobuchar, of my party -- visited with Ukrainian troops on the front lines in the east.
And that's because Americans and Ukrainians are united by deep bonds -- our shared values and our common hopes for the future.  And the American people, including nearly 1 million proud Ukrainian Americans, understand that so much depends on your success, not just for Ukrainians, but for Europe and for the United States. 
If you continue carrying your progress forward, then not only will you continue to build a more open, more democratic, more prosperous future that the Ukrainian people deserve, you will keep the international community united behind you in that effort.
And I hope the next administration will also want to be a supporter and a partner in your continued progress.  But as you know, no one else can do the hard work but the Ukrainian people.  It’s up to Ukrainian leaders and people to put the needs of the country above narrow personal interest, to place the general good above point scoring and local prejudices.  And that goes for everyone -- members of Ukraine’s government; representatives of the Rada, who took an oath to serve the Ukrainian people as a whole; judges who undertake the responsibility to dispense justice equally; members of the media and civil society and ordinary citizens whose job it is to hold those in power responsible.
As I said last year when I had the great honor to address the Rada, “Each of you has an obligation to answer the call of history and finally build a united, democratic Ukrainian nation that can stand the test of time.”
You're well underway to do that, Mr. President.  So I wanted to thank you, Petro, not only for your leadership but for your friendship.  I shared the same sentiment earlier this morning when I met Prime Minister Groysman earlier today.  As a nation you've made a lot of very difficult decisions.  And many more difficult political choices remain ahead.  But there is no denying the progress that Ukraine has made since the Maidan.  Together with a dynamic generation of Ukrainians committed to reform, you've begun to overhaul your government, your economy, your entire political system. 
In the year since my last visit, you continue to meet the reform requirements in the IMF assistance package.  You've strengthened the country’s banking sector.  You protected Ukrainian depositors by nationalizing Privatbank.  You implemented a groundbreaking, new electronic-asset-declaration system to fight corruption, which will help ensure that officials cannot leverage their political positions for personal gain.  
Your national anti-corruption bureau and the special anti-corruption prosecutor are providing and proving their impact when they have the resources.  And it’s imperative that you continue to strengthen all of your anti-corruption institutions to root out those who would return Ukraine to rule by cronyism and kleptocracy.  
Thanks to the vital steps you've taken, your economy is now growing again.  But there remains much work to be done to ensure Ukraine finally realizes its potential as a vibrant, modern economy.  Keep working with the IMF to implement the tough reforms that will make Ukraine’s economy sustainable.  Continue cleaning up the banking system.  Press forward with energy reforms that are eliminating Ukraine’s dependence on Russian gas.  Work to privatize state-owned enterprises transparently.  Create a business environment with responsible, legal, and regulatory systems that make Ukraine a destination for investment.  None of this will be easy.  None of what you've done so far has been easy, but you've done it.  And we know it’s going to be hard to continue to finish the job.  
You're fighting both against the cancer of corruption, which continues to eat away at Ukraine’s democracy within, and the unrelenting aggression of the Kremlin.  
Russia’s continued attempts to undermine your success, your security, your sovereignty, and your territorial integrity are manifold.  False propaganda attacks.  Attempts to destabilize your economy.  Ukraine, like every country in Europe, has a right to determine its own path.  Yet Russia seeks to deny that choice.  And the international community must continue to stand as one against Russian aggression and coercion.
There are over 1.7 million internally displaced people Oppression of Crimean Tatars continues.  More than 9,600 Ukrainians have been killed in the fighting in the east and more than 22,000 wounded in the conflict.  And fully one-fifth of those victims have been civilians.  
That's why in addition to the $3 billion in loan guarantees and the $750 million in assistance to fortify your economic resilience, the United States has provided $600 million in security assistance.  We've trained your national guard, conventional military forces, as well as special forces; helped you increase your readiness and make your force interoperable with NATO; provided armor, radars, night-vision devices, medical equipment -- all of which has saved lives and bolstered your defenses.
Together with our EU and G7 partners, we've made it clear that sanctions should remain in place until Russia fully -- I emphasize fully -- implements its commitments under the Minsk Agreement; and that the Crimea-related sanctions against Russia must remain in place until Russia returns full control to the people of Ukraine.
Although I know how -- you find this difficult to keep faith with the Minsk process when the Russians refuse to meet their security commitments, it remains the only viable framework for resolving the conflict in the Donbas, restoring Ukrainian governance in the east, and returning control of the international border to Ukraine.  It’s Ukraine’s best hope to move forward as a united country. 
But let me be perfectly clear, the political agreement cannot be implemented until Russian violence stops.  Only after Russia and its proxies in the east fulfill their obligation to end the fighting and let the Donbas again enjoy peace and security can Ukraine be expected to fulfill its political commitments.  
It’s no secret that Russia does not want you to succeed, Mr. President.  It’s not just about Ukraine.  It’s about the future we have long sought of a Europe whole, free, and at peace -- whole, free, and at peace -- something that is in the vital national interest of both the United States and all Europeans.
Your self-determination, your freedom from coercion, your success as a liberal democracy are all essential in realizing this objective.  
So I strongly urge the people of Ukraine:  Keep demonstrating your commitment to the rule of law; keep fighting corruption; insist on transparency; investigate and prosecute government officials who siphon off public funds for their own enrichment.  Russia over the last decade or so has used another foreign policy weapon.  It uses corruption as a tool of coercion to keep Ukraine vulnerable and dependent.  So pursue those reforms to root out corruption.  
It’s not just about good governance.  It’s about self-preservation.  It’s about your very national security.  It’s not just about good governance.  As I said at the beginning, this year our nations celebrate 25 years of diplomatic relations.  Over that time progress has come in fits and starts.  Sometimes we move forward, sometimes backwards.
But the Ukrainian people are like the American people, they never give up.  And one of the things that gives me the most hope for the future is the incredible energy and passion of Ukraine’s young people.  I’ve met with them on each of my previous visits here.  And I have no doubt that they will inspire, demand, and ultimately succeed in attaining the Ukraine that has been sought for for so long.  
On a personal note, Mr. President, I want say what a privilege it has been to support and stand with Ukraine over these past 25 years -- first as a senator and of late as Vice President. 
I’ve been inspired by your people, their courage, their resilience, brave Ukrainians who never gave up hope for a future of something better, who get up and go to work every day for a democratic and united Ukraine.  
And if you can continue to make progress, Mr. President, if you keep doing the hard work and making the difficult choices to put Ukraine first, I promise you the American people will stand with you.  This next year is going to be a very, very telling year -- a very telling year.  
There is a line that John Kennedy used in deciding to go to the moon.  He said, America is doing it because we can no longer -- we're no longer willing to postpone.  I believe the Ukrainian people are no longer willing to postpone a free, open, democratic, and prosperous Ukraine.  So seize it.
I’m looking forward to seeing what our nations can build together, Mr. President, over the next 25 years and beyond because as my grandfather would say, with the grace of the God, and the good will of the neighbors, which we can't count on very much in this neighborhood, we can get this done.  But it all depends on the willingness of your people to continue to insist on what they deserve because they deserve it.  
END
  
  
   
The White House
  November 21, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at a Joining Forces Event on Military Family Mental Health and Wellbeing as Prepared for Delivery
The Pentagon
Good afternoon.  It’s so wonderful to be with all of you today, and very special to be at the Pentagon.  Thank you General Lengyel and Sally, Chief Master Sergeant Brush and Blair for your leadership and for hosting us today.
The Biden family is a National Guard family.  So, it’s incredibly special that my last event at the Pentagon as Second Lady is to witness this National Guard milestone.
Eight years ago, our son Beau proudly deployed for year to Iraq with the Delaware Army National Guard 261st Signal Brigade in the Judge Advocate General's Corps.  When Beau returned home — knowing that Mrs. Obama and I had begun to plan the work eventually known as Joining Forces — he asked that we especially focus on de-stigmatizing and addressing the wounds that could not seen: such as PTSD and TBI.  The length of those wars and multiple deployments had naturally taken its toll.  And we needed to address the mental wellbeing of our military upfront with dignity and respect.
Through our Joining Forces initiative, First Lady Michelle Obama and I have done all that we could to shine a light on military families — to raise awareness for the challenges they confront, and still confront, that most Americans never have to face or could even imagine.  Not because they’re asking for attention — in fact, as you all know, our military families are self-reliant and resilient — rather, it’s our sacred obligation to support and honor them not only at war but when they return home as well.
The wars of this generation saw the National Guard deploying more, and more frequently, than ever before.  In fact, almost half of those who have or are serving in current wars have been Guard and Reservists.  National Guard service is a special service — with communities across the country relying upon you in their times of need — during floods, blizzards and other natural disasters.
The Guard is unique in that they are often far from bases and resources designed for military families.  Our men and women of the Guard sometimes go unnoticed in their neighborhoods, and their children in schools.  And, unfortunately, studies have shown Guard and Reserve troops can be at greater risk for mental health issues post-deployment.
That is one of the reasons back in 2012 I went to visit and lift up the incredible work being done between the Missouri Guard and Partners in Care, a nation-wide program connecting faith communities to Guard members and their families who need certain support and resources.  Partners in Care was stepping up, answering the call whether that meant lending a hand to watch a child for a few hours, mowing a lawn or grabbing some groceries.  They made Guard families feel a community, even if they weren’t physically surrounded by one.
And today, we have another incredible organization, answering the call in their own way.  From the bottom of my heart, I want to thank Barbara and everyone at Give an Hour for your strength, determination and foresight.  I always tell people: go to your strengths and Barbara, you have done just that.  You leveraged what you knew into an incredible organization of thousands of mental health providers willing to donate their time to help our troops, veterans and families.  Thank you.
Throughout our work with Joining Forces, Michelle and I have constantly challenged our friends, partners and stakeholders to do more.
There is one final very special person in this room I would like to thank.  She’s a military spouse.  Her husband served in the Marines.  She puts her whole heart into this job because it’s personal for her too.  We all know she deserves more credit than she’s given — particularly on mental health — for the work she has done, the bounty of which will be felt for many years to come.  And if not for her, I’m quite sure we may not even be standing here today.  That woman is Rory Brosius.  Rory, your dedication and passion inspire us all. Thank you for all you have done for Joining Forces and our country.
All of you sacrifice so much — and risk so much — to keep us safe.  Still, no matter the situation, you answer when called upon.  Whether it is through active duty deployment or domestic emergency, the National Guard is always there.  But sometimes we all encounter obstacles.  For our military, it can happen while transitioning back to civilian life; while dealing with the deployment of a spouse; or because of issues completely unrelated to their service.
But here is what we know for certain: mental health is not a military issue, a guard issue, a veteran issue; it’s a human issue.  Every single year, 1 in 5 Americans face a diagnosable mental health condition.  And these are our friends, our siblings, our children — they are us.  We know that facing these issues, people may feel isolated and alone.  They may withdraw because they feel that if they ask for help they will be seen as weak — somehow less than.  So, it’s our job to make sure that we begin to treat mental health in the same way we treat physical health.
For far too long, we have treated mental health conditions like depression, anxiety, or post-traumatic stress differently than we treat other diseases.  Just think about that.  We would never look at a friend who was having a heart attack and say, you’ll be fine.  But too often that’s exactly what happens when someone is struggling with a mental health condition.
The First Lady and I have seen firsthand how vitally important it is for us to completely change the way we address mental health in this country.
Take the story of Jenn Madden.  I’ve had the honor to get to know Jen in the past several years.  Jenn enlisted in the military when she was just 17 and began basic training on September 11, 2001.  Jenn’s service took her to Afghanistan where one of her best friends was killed in action.
When she came home in 2003, she struggled with the things that she had seen and experienced.  Jenn began to struggle with symptoms of post-traumatic stress — nightmares, depression, mood swings — but she didn’t know how to overcome them.  And Jenn fell on some really tough times — at one point she was living out of her car and was arrested.
But, she reached out for help and was eventually connected to a therapist through Give An Hour.  Through her therapist, Jenn learned to manage her post-traumatic stress, and she gradually got her life back on track.  Today, years later, Jenn is a licensed practical nurse and a mom of two.
Stories like Jenn’s are why in 2015, through our Joining Forces initiative, we helped to launch the Campaign to Change Direction — a collective impact effort to change the culture around mental health in our country.
And today, I’m so proud to be here with the Chief of the National Guard Bureau, General Lengyel, and Dr. Barbara Van Dahlen from Give an Hour.  We’re here to announce an important new memorandum of understanding between the National Guard, the Campaign to Change Direction, and Give an Hour.
You see, the National Guard gets it.  Their most valuable resource is their people, and the families that stand behind them.  Taking care of these individuals, and empowering them to take care of their own is essential to promoting health and well-being amongst the force.
With this MOU, we will reach countless guard members across this country with the 5 Signs.  We will be able to offer expanded mental health services to our guard members and families through a network of more than 7000 give an hour providers.   This is especially important for Guard families who don’t always live on base or near military communities.  So they’re not always close to military health facilities.  That’s why organizations like Give an Hour and Military One Source are so critical in filling the gaps for the enormous population of our armed services.
As a proud National Guard mom, this is personal.  I believe that our nation is indebted to you.  And we have to show you how much we appreciate your service, with more than just words. We’ve got to show you and your families that we’ve got your backs with real, concrete actions — actions like we’re seeing today between the National Guard Bureau and Give an Hour that will make a real difference.
We all know that our military members and their families are some of the strongest people around.  Regardless of the situation, your strength, resilience and selflessness shine through.  And I couldn’t be more grateful to be part of the Guard family.
Thank you, and God bless our troops and their families.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 18, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the 20th Anniversary Celebration of the Community College Research Center at Teachers College, Columbia University as Prepared for Delivery
New York, New York
Thursday, November 17, 2016
Community colleges aren’t prestigious.  The education isn’t high quality.  They’re second rate — an option of last resort.  We’ve all heard that.  But that’s just wrong. 
You know it.  I know it.  And the millions of people across our country who have received an affordable, quality higher education at a community college know it.
Here’s what we know: 35 percent of America’s four-year college graduates complete their degrees because they attended a community college; over 12 percent of all 2014 doctoral recipients attended a community college; And certain community college graduates make higher wages than 4-year college graduates.
But we all know that or we wouldn’t be here this evening.  Thank you Teachers College — Tom and Susan — for welcoming me back.  It was a privilege to deliver the commencement address here in 2010 and to meet with student veterans back in 2013.
But, today is distinct and holds a special place in my heart as we celebrate the Community College Research Center’s 20th anniversary.  The practitioners at CCRC have been leaders in this space far beyond 20 years — bringing to light the importance of community colleges to our country and for millions of students.  And I’d like to add my voice and thank Jesse for having the vision to foresee the need for this research.  But our work is only getting started and I’ll get to that shortly.
We all have our own stories on why we are passionate about education.  I grew up in the sixties — I’m a sixties girl from Philly.  Before Joe, the men I dated wore jeans and clogs, and my hair was down past my waist, and some of theirs was too.  So, when a clean-cut Senator asked me out on a date, and showed up at my door wearing a suit and leather loafers, I wasn’t quite sure. 
But, what we found in one another was a shared sense of responsibility, and a passion to level the playing field.  Throughout his career in the Senate, and now as Vice President, my husband Joe has fought for the middle class — to give all Americans a fair shot at the American Dream.  That same principle is why I teach at a community college.  I teach to give my students confidence so that they know there’s no limit to how far they can go.  Education is the great equalizer.  
The past eight years have been an amazing opportunity that I honestly never even imagined.  Actually, I’ve pretty much been living a double life since Joe was first elected Vice President.  One moment, I’m taping a live interview at 7:15 AM in the Blue Room at the White House for the TODAY Show talking about President Obama’s continued support of community colleges.  And then the next moment, at 7:55 AM, I’m in my cubicle at Northern Virginia Community College prepping to teach my 8:00 AM English Comp class.
Even today, after I left my classroom, I had to change out of my teacher outfit in the lounge of the DCA airport to put on my Second Lady outfit.
Many of my students don’t know I have two jobs.  For example, at the end of one semester, a student of mine came running into my classroom and said, “Dr. B, Dr. B I saw you on the television last night with First Lady Michelle Obama.”  And my student said to her mother, “Mom!  Mom!  That’s my English teacher!”  And her mother said, “That’s not your teacher, that’s the Second Lady.”  They may not know that I’m married to the Vice President, but my students do know that my first priority is to them.
As a teacher, I’ve loved being part of the Obama-Biden Administration which believes as passionately as I do in education. When we were elected, our economy was losing 800,000 jobs a month.  We were in the depths of the worst recession since the Great Depression.  And from day one, our administration saw community colleges as critical to revitalizing the American economy. 
I was in the right place at the right time.  Because, as we all know, community colleges connect the dots.  They grant two-year degrees, provide new skills training or an affordable pathway for those who want to articulate to a four-year university.
So, in 2010, at the community college where I teach, President Obama signed into law a bill that invested nearly two billion dollars in over 700 community colleges.  And called for the first-ever White House Community College Summit.  This was our moment.  Putting community college front and center.  That investment paid off big dividends for our country: building more than 2,500 partnerships between community colleges and employers; and training nearly 300,000 skilled workers.
In 2012, I headed out on a community-college-to-career bus tour to shine a light on these innovative workforce partnerships between community colleges and local employers.  In two days, we traveled 800 miles through seven cities in five states, visiting some amazing, talented students, teachers, business and local leaders.  But rather than tell you about it, I would like to show it to you. Video
By partnering with local businesses, community colleges answered the call of our nation — to provide a well-equipped and well-trained workforce. That’s what's so special about community colleges. 
So, what’s next?  By the end of this decade two-thirds of all job openings will require some form of higher education.  Despite all the progress we’ve made in the last eight years to make higher education more accessible, too many hardworking Americans still feel as if a college education is out of reach.  Rising tuition costs is one key factor. 
That’s why I believe — as does President Obama — that community college should be free for all responsible students.  Two years of free community college will allow students to earn the first half of a bachelor’s degree or acquire a professional certificate without being saddled with decades of debt.
According to the College Promise Campaign's first annual report, just released last month, since President Obama announced his free community college proposal, more than 36 college promise programs have launched in cities, states and communities across the country.  There are now more than 150 programs across 37 states offering some form of free community college.
Early research has shown that Promise programs, particularly those offering pathways to a four year university, can be key to boosting local economic development and increasing the number of people staying in their communities.  The reason is pretty simple: because 90 percent of our population lives within 25 miles of a community college.
We’re also seeing more and more people are now giving community colleges a fresh look.  For example, Oregon launched its college promise program this year and nearly 6,000 new students enrolled in community colleges all across the state.
But, let’s be honest: simply enrolling in a community college isn’t enough.  Community colleges may be the first to open the doors to college for students, but we have to retain students and help them complete their degree. 
Throughout my visits to nearly 50 college campuses, I’ve seen how dual-enrollment courses, early-college high schools, mentors and community service opportunities, as well as other college-credit programs, have consistently increased student achievement. 
If we pair those proven strategies with a college promise program, I believe we’ll be even more successful in keeping students in the classroom through graduation.  That’s exactly what I saw in Tennessee, which offers dual-enrollment programs for high school students and launched a state-wide college promise program.  More than 80 percent of students who enrolled in the Tennessee Promise in the fall of 2015 returned for their second semester of classes in the spring of 2016.
While we don’t have all the data we need, I think it’s clear that the promise of free community college is making a real difference for thousands of students in every corner of the country.  It’s especially important for the new majority of students who attend one of America’s community colleges who are often older, returning to school while maintaining a full-time job or raising a family — and in many cases both.
While our administration has strived to make community colleges more affordable and more attractive for more students to attend college, there’s still so much more we can and must do.  Because, at the end of the day it’s all about the outcomes.  It’s about completion for purpose.  It’s about getting our students on the right pathway with links to a good paying job so they can provide for themselves and their families.
CCRC has been at the forefront since day one tracking and creating the data sets we need to evaluate and to better understand our students.  For the past twenty years, you have been providing the data that policy makers need to better understand the ways in which community colleges provide benefits to students that occur nowhere else in higher education. 
Because of your ground breaking research, we can identify the challenges community college students face and paths to overcoming them.  Because of you, individual colleges and policy makers can make better investments in what works and what doesn’t.  You have been a champion for community colleges.  You literally wrote the book on “Redesigning America’s Community Colleges” to provide a clearer path to student success.  But I need to ask you to do more. 
First, we must document the lived experience of students.  The experiences that I’ve seen in my classroom.  Students who can’t pay for parking.  Students who get kicked of their homes.  Students who suffer from depression.  As you know, we need to make the case for wrap around services – I’ve seen it in the lives of my students.  These are not just data points.  These data points have names for me. 
Second, we need you to keep publishing data on best teaching practices, so that community college faculty can use the kinds of teaching strategies that best help their students inside the thousands of individual classrooms.
Above all, you must continue to document the case that we can’t afford not to invest in our community colleges. 
We’ve asked a lot of you over the past 20 years — but we can’t stop now.  The secret on community colleges is out and our work is more vital than ever.  CCRC, I know you’re up for this challenge.
So, what’s next for me?  I’m going to keep teaching.  I’ll continue serving on the College Promise Advisory Board to work with elected officials and business leaders to make community college free.  And with your help, we’ll keep the momentum going.  We can’t afford to put the brakes on.
Before I conclude, on a personal note, I want to thank you from my heart and Joe’s for your love, support, and kindness over the last eight years.  There were some dark days for the Biden family this past year and you lifted us up — we couldn’t have done it without you.  Serving our country has been a great honor.  It’s been the journey of a lifetime. 
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 November 14, 2016
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Joining Forces Capstone Reception
East Room
5:17 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  So good afternoon.  It’s so wonderful to be here with all of you today.  And let me start by thanking Sheila Casey, a true friend and champion for all military families, including mine.  Thank you, Sheila, for your kind words and support over the years.  It’s been a pleasure working with you and your husband, General Casey.
Well, it’s hard to believe that after five years, this is our last Joining Forces event.  I remember the moment eight years ago, backstage in Springfield, Illinois, when Michelle and I decided we wanted to focus on this important issue together.  It was that exciting day when then-Senator Obama announced that my husband Joe would be his running mate.  Michelle turned to me and asked what would I like to work on if we won.  And I told her that I wanted to tackle the issues that our military families were facing, and she said, “Me too!”  (Laughter.)  For me, I couldn’t think of anything more fulfilling than serving those who have sacrificed so much for our country.
One thing we say in the Biden family -- and I know you all feel it in your hearts -- is that our country has one sacred obligation -- to equip those we send to war, and to care for them and their families during deployments and when they return.  (Applause.)  
Back in 2008, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan were going strong.  Hundreds of thousands of our troops were deployed.  So I called the National Guard and said I wanted to help the families of military families whose loved ones were serving overseas.  They connected me with Delaware Boots on the Ground, which was helping to match the everyday needs of our military -- they’re here, that’s why it’s making me so emotional -- to match the everyday needs of military families with folks who could provide the service.  If you need a tire changed, Boots was there for you.  If you had a leaky roof, Boots was there.  If you needed diapers or a new crib, Boots was there again.  
Delaware Boots on the Ground made such a big difference for military families in Delaware that Governor Ruth Ann Minner declared on July 4th, 2007, Delaware Boots on the Ground Day.  Remember guys?  And after we were elected to the White House, I wanted to keep going.  I wanted to keep doing all the things that I could for military families -- not just in Delaware, but all across our nation.  Because, like Michelle, I had been so inspired by the military families, the incredible military families I had met and gotten to know over the years.  
That’s why, when we called upon you to help us shine a light on our military families, we wanted to raise awareness of the challenges that they confront and still confront that most Americans never have to face or can even imagine.  Sending loved ones into harm’s way.  Enduring countless separations during training.  Starting over on different bases in different towns again and again.
All of you in this room, from the veterans and military spouses we met eight years ago on the campaign trail to the nonprofits, schools, foundations, businesses, associations, civil servants and Americans of every stripe, have been with us every step of the way since we launched Joining Forces.  You have been our lifeline to our military families.  You’ve helped us better understand the unique challenges that they face.  You’ve been critical in helping us find solutions to better support those amazing families.  You’ve helped us remind folks that we can all make a difference, not just in word on Veterans Day or Memorial Day, but with good deeds and best efforts each and every day of the year, by doing what we do best.  
As a lifelong educator and as a military mom, the way we reach out to our military children in our classrooms is especially close to my heart.  That’s why I’ve been so proud to work with organizations like the Military Child Education Coalition.  Together, we launched Operation Educate the Educators to encourage teaching colleges to recognize military children in their curriculum.  To date, more than 100 colleges and universities have signed up to train thousands of future teachers so that they are prepared to identify the challenges military kids face.  (Applause.)  
And one of the first groups that Michelle and I partnered with to launch Joining Forces five years ago was the National Math and Science initiative.  Thanks to NMSI’s college readiness program, we’re helping to ensure that students at 200 military-connected schools in 33 states across the country are prepared for the rigors of college and a career.  
I’d also like to thank the media, who has helped us share the story of the military family.  And that includes everyone from Elmo and “Sesame Street,” to “Reading Rainbow” with LeVar Burton, who have shined a light on military-connected children, as well as the History Channel, which has lifted up our veterans, servicemembers, and their families.  And I’d especially like to thank CEO of History Channel, Nancy Dubuc, for being here today.
All of you have stepped up for our military and their families in your own unique ways.  That’s what you do.  And that’s why you’re here today.  Because Michelle and I want you to know just how much we appreciate everything that you’ve done and everything that you will continue to do to support those who serve our country.
And we all need to keep doing this work, because our military families will continue to serve and sacrifice.  Our men and women in uniform will continue to deploy.  Their spouses and children will continue to move from base to base, and eventually they will transition to civilian life.  That’s why this work matters.  And we have to show them that we have their backs.
You know, I believe we couldn’t have asked for a better champion for our military families than Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  I know you all feel this.  She is a woman like no other.  (Applause.)  Whip smart.  Passionate.  Loyal.  For our nation, she’s been a true role model, especially for young girls.  She’s raised two amazing girls on her -- of her own whose potential has no bounds.  And she’s shown the same warmth and care for her girls that she has with our grandchildren. 
And from day one, Michelle was determined to make a real and lasting difference in the lives of our military and their families -- measurable action, not just words.  She has had the courage to take on veteran homelessness, making the seemingly impossible possible.  (Applause.)  Naturally, freely, warmly she brings joy and hope often simply through a hug to the deployed caregivers and wounded warriors.
As a military mom, I am grateful for her service.  I love her.  We’re family.  Our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  Oh, my goodness.  (Laughter.)  This wasn’t supposed to be tearful.  (Laughter.)  Oh, wow, look at you all.  What an evening, what a day.
First of all, let me thank -- 
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  I love you!
MRS. OBAMA:  We love you all.  We love you all more than you can know.  (Applause.)  This community has kept us going through a lot.  So let me just start by, of course, recognizing my partner in crime, Jill Biden, for that introduction.  Oh, my goodness.  (Applause.)  Jill has been, by far, the best partner I could have ever imagined, not just for the work on Joining Forces, but our families have joined forces in so many ways.  I’m just grateful to have her by my side.  She’s been a devoted advocate for our military community long before she ever came to the White House.  This is her cause, as you can hear from her words.  This is her mission.  And her passion has really been at the heart and soul of Joining Forces from the beginning.
But Jill is much more than a partner.  She is one of my dearest friends.  And, as Jill said, we’re family.  This is my girl right here.  (Applause.)  We have laughed together.  We have been silly together.  We have cried a lot.  (Laughter.)   We’ve been there for each other as much as we can throughout this amazing journey.  And Jill is not just brilliant, but she is kind.  She is very funny.  And she is one of the strongest people I know.  I love and admire her with all my heart.  So thank you, Jill.  (Applause.)  
And of course, thanks to all of you -- my goodness -- folks from every sector of our society who’ve come together through Joining Forces -- CEOs and government officials, medical professionals and educators.  And most of all, our extraordinary servicemembers, our amazing veterans, oh, and our military families.  (Applause.)  
Just looking out over this room, so many of you have been with us right from the very beginning, way back in those early days when Jill and I were just starting to figure out what Joining Forces would look like.  And back then, we’d get together with military spouses, and Blue and Gold Star families.  We’d talk to veterans, and of course we talked to troops.  And we’d ask the simple questions:  How are things going?  Do you have the support that you need?  What can we do to help?  
And, as Jill said, we continue to be blown away by your honesty and your courage, your sacrifice, your service, moving your families across the country, across the globe every few years, enduring deployment after deployment, struggling to maintain your careers and care for your family -- I could go on and on.  You keep us from complaining about anything.  And I know that some of you were probably a little skeptical of us at first.  Some may have wondered, how are these two with almost no budget going to make a difference?  (Laughter.)  And rightfully so, wondering would this just be another PR campaign?  Because you had seen plenty of tributes and parades and memorials, all of which are very important, but nowhere near enough.
As I said earlier today, talk simply is not enough.  So Jill and I knew it was time to act, and that’s why we decided that the only measure of our success would be whether you all could see and feel a concrete difference in your lives.  That was the only thing we cared about.
So in 2011, we issued a call to all Americans to step up and serve our military community as well as you all have served this country -– not just with kind words, but with real resources, with real support.  And as we told you, people answered that call time and again.  And that’s what you should know about this country.  Just when you wonder whether we’re crazy -- (laughter) -- we’re not.  We’re good people, all over the place.  Know that about this country.  (Applause.)  We are made up of good people.  
Folks from every industry, every corner of this country, they raised their hand every time and they said, yeah, I can help.  And just think for a minute about everything we’ve achieved together.  I mean, you heard it in that beautiful video.  In just five and a half years -- let’s just stop there -- five and a half years, our businesses and companies have hired or trained more than 1.5 million veterans and military spouses, and the unemployment rate for our veterans has been cut in half.  (Applause.)  That’s because of you.  (Applause.)  
Governors and legislatures in 50 states, all 50 states, took action to help military spouses transfer their licenses and continue their careers as they move from state to state -- simple ask.  I think there were only two when we first started.  And we were like, hey, can we get this done?  Folks were like, yeah!  
We provided new training and tools for thousands of healthcare providers.  New networks and support for our caregivers.  New resources and educational opportunities for our amazing military kids who, by the way, really blow us away.  Those kids are some of the most amazing, poised -- (applause) -- those are our next leaders.  So another thing to know about this country, we’re in good hands, because our young people -- we’ve got some good young people.  We do.  (Applause.)  
And working with mayors and local officials, as we celebrated earlier today, we have ended veteran homelessness in cities and states across this country, housing 354,000 homeless veterans and their families.  (Applause.)  We did that.  We did that.  Through wonderful VA programs, we’ve worked to cut veterans’ homelessness nearly in half.  And we did that in just a couple of years.
That’s just some of what Joining Forces has been able to accomplish, and it’s because of you.  Jill and I, we just ask, and then we wait for the press conference.  We come in and we go, look what we did!  (Laughter.)  But we are so incredibly proud of you.  You want the country to see this.  This is America.  And Jill and I, we are so grateful for everything you all have done.  
But what we do not feel is satisfied, because --
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  That’s right!
MRS. OBAMA:  That’s my hype man back there.  (Laughter.)  Because for everything we’ve accomplished, we also know that every day, people across America thankfully are signing up to put on our country’s uniform, and so many others hang it up for good and join the ranks of our veterans.  
So our work is nowhere near finished.  And it never will be.  So my main message to all of you today is let’s just keep this going.  Let’s keep it going.  (Applause.)  Plain and simple.  (Applause.)  We don’t get all of this done in such a short period of time and just not keep pushing.  
And to our servicemembers, our veterans, and to our military families, I urge you to never settle for anything less.  This effort, it hasn’t been perfect.  We haven’t achieved every goal.  We haven’t righted every wrong.  But believe me, from now on, this should be the baseline.  This should be the minimum level of support our military should feel from their White House all the way down to every community in this country.  (Applause.)  They should feel it from the President and the Vice President, from the First and Second spouses on down to the VA, to VSOs, to schools, to hospitals, to congregations, to citizens.  That’s true regardless of who is in charge or what party they belong to. 
Because this issue has nothing to do with whether you are a Democrat, a Republican or an independent.  It is so much bigger than that.  It’s about supporting our American heroes.  (Applause.)  And it’s about standing up for who we are as a nation.  And that’s something we can all agree on.  There should never ever be any daylight between any of us when it comes to that.  
So you all need to work with the next administration to continue these efforts.  Whatever it is that you’re working on, I want you to find new partners in the next administration.  I want you to work with them just like you worked with us on the issues that matter most to our military community.  And I want you all to know that while today might be our last time together here as First Lady -- and I hate to say Second Lady, because there’s nothing second about Jill -- (laughter and applause) -- but we are not saying goodbye.  This is not the end.  
Jill and I intend to keep working on this issue for the rest of our lives.  (Applause.)  We will figure out a way to use whatever platforms we have next.  And with your help, we know that the spirit of this movement will live on.  We will continue to find ways to be supportive long after we leave the White House.
This movement will live on.  It will live on in every military spouse who steps up and says, I’m tough, but even I can’t do this alone, and every Governor who responds, you don’t have to.  It will live on in every veteran looking to bring their skills and their training to our workforce, and every CEO who gives them that chance.  It will live on in every servicemember who knows their spouse is being supported during their deployment, and every teacher who goes that extra mile to make sure their kids feel welcome in a new school.
This effort is going to live on because it belongs to each of us and to every American who joins forces to support America’s heroes.  So instead of saying goodbye, I want to end as I started -- by once again saying thank you.  (Applause.)  This has been one of the greatest pleasures of my life, getting to know this community.  We are grateful.  We are grateful.  And we have so much to feel grateful for in this country.  Let us never forget that.
Let’s get to work.  Thank you all.  God bless.  (Applause.)  
END  
5:48 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 14, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Los Angeles City College as Prepared for Delivery
Los Angeles, California
Good morning, Los Angeles!  Thank you for welcoming me with such warmth and enthusiasm!
A few minutes ago you heard two incredible women speak.  Two women with very different stories, but one unifying theme: the opportunity — paramount above all else — to receive an education.  Education is the great equalizer.  Education is something that no one can ever take away from you — it becomes your knowledge, your skills.
Alexa’s story may sound like many of yours.  She didn’t immediately enter college after graduating high school but she was determined to get the education she needed to create a better life for herself and her family.  And, Crystal knew from an early age that education was vital to anything she would try to achieve in the future.  Crystal, like Alexa, will be the first in her family to graduate high school.
That’s why we are here today.  It’s not just about policy, this is about people.  This is about all the Alexas and Crystals here today.  This is about all the students I have known for over 30 years.  Students who are single parents, students who are returning to school, students who are attending college for the first time.  For millions of people across our country, community college is the single best path to achieving their dreams — whether that means earning a four-year degree or finding a rewarding career.
It’s the kind of place where young people can save money before they start a four-year school.  They can transfer their credits.  It is a place where returning students, parents and workers can retool and retrain — taking their careers to the next level.  It’s where you don’t have to choose between pursuing an education and supporting your family — you can do both because it’s flexible.
The more than 1,300 community colleges nationwide are not just the key to a brighter future for their students, they are the backbone of America’s postsecondary education and training system — and one of the keys to a more prosperous economic future.
As Second Lady, I have visited almost 50 community colleges campuses, while continuing to work at one myself.  In fact, I was just in my classroom yesterday and will be back again tomorrow.  So, I feel right at home with all of you here.
But, there is just something about today that feels different.  Today, there is tremendous reason to celebrate.  Today is about a promise that we as Americans must make to all of you.  We are here to celebrate the LA College Promise.
But what does that mean?  A promise is not just a thought or a nice idea.  No, a promise is a declaration.  A declaration that your Mayor, your schools and your teachers are making to you.  It’s a declaration that says we believe in you — every single person here.  We believe in your determination and resilience.  We are making a declaration — an assurance that you can attend one year of college tuition free.  An assurance that you can concentrate on your studies, and get ahead.
This is a promise that you can define your own future without having to worry about being burdened by decades of debt.  That you can focus on school rather than having to juggle multiple jobs.  And, ultimately, we use the word promise because that is what we see in all of you.  The promise of a brighter future for our communities, our families, and for our country.
But promises aren’t a one way street.  Did you really think we’d let you off that easy?  By accepting this promise — this challenge — you, in turn, must seize the opportunity, work to your fullest potential, give it your all, and most importantly, give back to your community once you’ve graduated.  And that’s why I want to thank your incredibly hardworking Mayor, Eric Garcetti, for inviting me here today.
Your Mayor gets it.  Your Lieutenant Governor gets it.  All of us believe that given the promise of a college education, more students will exceed their own limitations and reach their full potential. 
To the students here today: you must continue the momentum for promise programs across the state.  You must be a champion for the cause.  Because there’s so much more work to be done.  We need your help to make sure all Americans have the opportunity they deserve to go to college, grow into careers they love, and provide a brighter future for their families.
Since the President announced his proposal to make two years of community college free for all responsible students, more than 36 college promise programs have been launched in cities, states, and communities all across the country.  Collectively, these new programs add over $150 million to serve over 180,000 students at community colleges.
In California alone, there are now 23 college promise programs.  In places like Oakland and Richmond, Long Beach and Ventura, San Diego and Santa Barbara, and now here in Los Angeles we see the promise of an affordable, quality education being extended to California’s community college students.  Because of your efforts — because of the efforts of all of the incredible leaders here on stage with me today — there’s real momentum for a statewide California promise.
Starting a free community college program may not seem easy, but Los Angeles is showing the country that one of the biggest and most diverse cities can make this possible when its leaders, government officials, and communities come together to make a more affordable college degree a reality for its students.  What you’re doing here in L.A. is a model for the nation.  You’re sending a powerful message to the next generation that they can go as far as their talents and determination will take them.
So, how many high school students do we have here today?  Stand up.  If any of you are unsure about going to college, I hope you will leave here today a little more optimistic and excited about your options.  Never be complacent.  Always persevere.  Recognize and take advantage of this incredible opportunity.  You’ve got a state-of-the-art education system right here in California — use it!  Be confidence.  Know that you can succeed.  I believe in you.  President Obama believes in you.  This is our promise.  We’ve got your back.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 07, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the 20th Annual CAF Conference
The Willard Hotel
Washington, D.C.
2:42 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Sorry to disappoint you.  (Laughter.) 
Many of you in this room have been -- had the opportunity to be introduced by and given nice introductions by your presenters.  And a lot of it is boilerplate.  But I must tell you -- I mean this sincerely -- the meaningfulness of the introduction is in direct proportion to the respect you have for the person introducing you.  And it means a great deal to me. 
Secretary/Ambassador Carla Hills and I go back a long way.  And we were -- I was a leader in the Senate, and she was a leader in a Republican administration.  And she was one of the most formidable minds I ever found myself disagreeing with on specific policy and domestic policy at the time.  (Laughter.) 
So I want to thank -- I know she’s an ambassador.  But I think it’s a pretty big deal to be a Secretary too -- former Secretary and Ambassador Carla Hills for her lovely introduction.
And, Enrique, Mr. President, I should say, I want to thank you for 25 years of distinguished service to CAF.  Your leadership has helped make CAF, and I mean it sincerely, one of the most respected and effective institutions advancing Latin American development.  And you will be missed, but I imagine you're not going to miss it all.  It’s a lot of work.  But thank you for all you've done.
And Luis is not here, the Secretary General, because he had a death in the family.  But I also think he’s doing an incredible job.  And I send my sympathies and hope he’s well.
And, Michael Shifter, the Inter-American Dialogue President -- that's a fancy foreign policy term for saying you actually get people talking to one another.  And it matters.  And I also want to thank, as I said, Carla again for that introduction.
For 20 years, this conference has brought together the leading thinkers -- and I’m not trying to be flattering -- but the leading thinkers and policy makers dedicated to this hemisphere. 
And in that time, thanks in part to the leadership of the people assembled in this room, we’ve witnessed a significant sea change in the region.  The prospects for unlocking enormous potential that exists in our hemisphere are fundamentally different today than they were 20 even 10 years ago -- or even five years ago.      
For the first time in history, in my view, it’s possible to imagine a hemisphere that is middle-class, democratic, and secure from northern Canada to the tip of Chile.
And it’s going to take a lot of hard work, a lot of sustained commitment from all the countries in the hemisphere, including the United States, to get that done.  But I really believe it is possible.  As my grandfather would say, with the grace of God and the good will of the neighbors, we've got a chance to do something that could only be dreamed of even five to 10 years ago.
Because we have everything we need to lead the world in the future.  There is no reason why the Western Hemisphere in the 21st century won’t be the most consequential hemisphere in the world.  I mean that sincerely.  We have the resources.  We possess the ingenuity, the values, and the dynamism.  All exist in this hemisphere.  It’s all here.
And President Obama and I recognized from the day we took office that there was a lot of history, a lot of baggage shaping our responsibilities and our relationships in the hemisphere.  So we made it clear at the outset we weren’t going to be bound by the mistakes of the past or trapped by outdated ideologies. 
Our relationships would be grounded in mutual respect.  We no longer would ask:  What can the United States do for the region? 
But:  What can we do with the region?
I’ve met with almost literally every President in the hemisphere.  And that's the point I made clear from the beginning.  Again, it’s not about what we can do for you.  It’s about what we can do with you.  And it has to be based upon a respect that is across the board and sometimes has been lacking in the past 150 years.
No region of the world is of greater consequence to the security and prosperity of the United States than the hemisphere.  It’s in our self-interest to see our hemisphere reach its full potential.  That’s why we’ve made it a priority to increase our high-level economic cooperation and boost our trading relationships throughout the region.  Nearly half of our exports -- $670 billion annually -- go to countries in the hemisphere. 
That's why we’ve created programs to spur entrepreneurship, build business-to-business relationships, and foster more small- to medium-sized enterprises that create jobs and generate economic growth.  This is not a zero-sum game.  The more the region grows, the more prosperous it is, the better we are off in the hemisphere, but in the United States, as well.  It’s in our naked self-interest to see this happen, besides the right thing to do.
It’s why we’ve committed to increase educational opportunities and student exchanges through initiatives like 100,000 Strong in the Americas so that young talented people from all our nations can learn together, lean from one another; and so they can be exposed to the greatest research universities in the world.  That sounds like chauvinism, but it is a fact -- the greatest concentration of research universities in the entire world because President Eisenhower was smart back when we tried to reorganize our research efforts and decided that it should not all be in the government.  It should go through independent universities.
That's why we championed the sensible approach to immigration -- one that protects our borders, while providing opportunity for 11 million undocumented immigrants to come out of the shadows and contribute, which they're already doing, contributing their fair share and benefitting from their contributions to this nation.
It’s also why we chose to change our Cuba policy that was both ineffective and a stumbling block to our bilateral relationships with multiple countries in the region, throughout the hemisphere.  Re-establishing diplomatic relations with Cuba opened up more space for us to get things done in the region.  And it made it easier for us to talk to our neighbors, cooperate, and talk openly without pushback about human rights.  Everyone in the hemisphere should be talking about human rights -- whether it’s in Cuba, or in Venezuela, wherever they are being denied on occasion or systematically.
At the same time, we’ve made it clear that jettisoning the last vestige of the Cold War in the Americas, it didn't mean jettisoning our commitment to human rights.  Rather, as I said, we expect our partners throughout the region to stand with us and condemn abuses that fly in the face of our most basic democratic values wherever that occurs.
So I’m optimistic about the future of the region.  We can see the possibilities that exist if we keep heading in the right direction.
But I’m also optimistic about the complexity -- I’m not naïve about the complexity of the challenges that still persist.
Even as we meet today, we’re seeing major political shifts take place across the region.  In Brazil, the people following their constitution to navigate an economically and politically difficult time, abiding by established procedures to manage the transition in power, actually did that. 
The United States will continue to work closely with President Temer as the Brazil government addresses its pressing challenges because Brazil is and will remain one of the United States’ closest partners in the region.  Because with democracies, the partnership is not based on two leaders, it’s based on an enduring relationship between two peoples.
Next door in Venezuela, however, we’re seeing the government revert to repressive tactics in violation of its own constitution -- tactics that violate the Inter-American Democratic Charter, which clearly says that:  “The peoples of the Americas have a right to democracy and their governments have an obligation to promote and defend it.”
Just last week, hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans converged on Caracas to demand their constitutional right to a presidential recall referendum.  Their voices must not be ignored.  A recall referendum should take place by the end of this year, and the Venezuelan constitution should be respected.
And political prisoners should be released. 
And the United States stands ready to work with all of our partners in the region to facilitate a dialogue between the government and the opposition that will help improve the lives of the Venezuelan people. 
At the same time, there are bright spots, as well -- like the incredible transformation that has taken place and holds enormous promise in Colombia.  The Colombian people have shown great courage and determination to overcome more than five decades of crushing conflict and bring their country back from the brink of economic collapse. 
Successive leaders made tough choices to put the well-being of the Colombian people first.   And because of that fortitude, today, the Colombian government and the FARC have agreed to an accord that offers hope for peace.  I emphasize:  Hope for peace.
We know that a signed agreement will not be the end, only the next phase in Colombia’s difficult journey toward enduring peace.
Implementation will be difficult and costly.  That’s why the United States has pledged more than $390 million at the outset to support the Colombian peace plan.
And together with the international community, we will continue to stand with the Colombian people as they build a new future for themselves.  There’s real promise.  A lot of work, but real promise.
We’re also seeing positive momentum in Argentina, with President -- new president, by the way -- has paved a reform agenda for a way for Argentina to return to the international financial community.
And the reinvigorated partnership between Argentina and the United States has already opened doors to improve security, increase trade and investment, strengthen energy sector cooperation between both our nations.
So, this is a critical moment for the region.  A crossroads marked by both opportunities and real challenges.
The choices we make now will define the character of our hemisphere for the remainder of this century.  So with the rest of my time today, I’d like to focus on three areas that I believe -- if we get them right -- we can accelerate our progress and lift up the lives of the people throughout the hemisphere.
First, no democracy can be sustained without economic growth.  And economic growth cannot flourish in the absence of the rule of law.
That’s not a United States moral judgement that's being made.  It’s sort of the new physics of economic relationships.  Businesses do not invest in nations where the rules are not transparent and predictable, where the court system is not fair, where intellectual property is not protected.  So it’s absolutely critical to root out the significant remaining vestiges of corruption that remain wherever governments have been too long run by bribery and influence peddling.
Corruption is a cancer that eats at the body politic, rips the fabric of any society where it is proliferated, promoting inequity and siphoning away billions of government dollars that could otherwise help feed children, build schools, improve infrastructure, significantly increase their security capability. 
Corruption aids and abets human rights abuses, fuels organized crime, seeds instability in the country where it prevails and in the region.
These problems all feed on one another and the United States, among others, is trying to help our partners take the hard but necessary steps to arrest the cycle of corruption where it exists.
With the Inter-American Development Bank and other partners, we supported efforts to improve the business environment -- more transparency, streamlined customs procedures, improved tax collection.  Representatives from the Department of Justice are assisting local officials with investigations to fight organized crime.  We’ve sent security advisors to help train civilian police forces to respect human rights and aid prosecutors so that people can be confident in the rule of law.  Where there is no impunity.  Where there is no impunity.
The momentum is building all across the region.  And we’ve seen citizens, who were in the shadows before, becoming activists.  We’ve seen brave prosecutors and judges pursue corrupt officials and start to prove to the people of the region that no one is above the law.
In Guatemala, for example, the Attorney General, working with the U.N. International Commission Against Impunity, has dismantled criminal networks, prosecuted military officials, even charged the former President and vice president with corruption.  When we were doing the -- what they referred to as a version of Plan Columbia, the sitting President did not want to keep SICA.  We made it a condition.  You keep it or you get no help, the very international institution that helped bring down a corrupt system -- beginning to bring down a corrupt system.
We insisted that the mandate of the commission be renewed in order to build greater confidence in Guatemala’s institutions and continue its good work. 
And when Guatemala then elected Jimmy Morales, a former comedian, on his promise to clean up the government, I flew down to attend the  .
During his speech, and I’ve been to a lot of  s.  Matter of fact, as I heard Carla Hill describe me, I thought, God I cannot be that old.  (Laughter.)  They must be talking about somebody else.
By the way, I subscribe -- there was a great American baseball player named Satchel Paige.  He was an African American, wasn’t allowed to go to “the big leagues” until he was 45 years old.  That’s 10 years beyond any pitcher’s prime.  On his 47th birthday, he pitched a win and the press huddled into the locker room to say, Satch, 47, you pitched a win, never happened before.  How do you feel about your birthday today, Satch?
He said, boys, that’s not how I look at age. 
They said, how do you look at it?
He looked back, he said, fellahs, way I look at it is this way:  How old would you be if you didn’t know how old you are?  I’m 42.  (Laughter.)  And I’m looking at an audience of college students here.
But all kidding aside, I’ve been to a lot of  s, and President Morales did something amazing.  He asked, when he was sworn in, the audience and all the citizens watching at home to stand and place their right hands over their hearts, and join him in taking an oath.  An oath to fight corruption and put Guatemala first.
Some thought it was just theater, but it was more than theater.  It was a significant historical break from the past on the part of a President the day he was sworn in.  It was a recognition that he can’t do it alone, that everyone has to contribute.  And it was a powerful sign that the region is beginning to change.
The second key ingredient for economic growth depends on securing access to energy that is affordable and reliable.  If you can’t turn on the lights, you can’t make a living.  If you can’t turn on the lights, businesses are not going to promote themselves in your region.  Businesses.  Businesses.
Students don’t achieve their full potential when they can’t study after dark or connect to the Internet.  Economies don’t grow when you can’t turn on the lights.
That’s why the energy security in the region has been a priority for our administration from the beginning.  And now is the moment to lock in sustainable energy security that will enable -- and endure -- the whole region when volatile oil prices inevitably rise again.
The good news is, thanks to our abundance of natural gas and clean and renewable energy resources in North America, North America is now the epicenter of energy for the 21st century.  Not the Saudi Arabian peninsula.  Not Venezuela.  Not Nigeria.  Not Russia.  North America.  North America -- Mexico, the United States, and Canada.  It gives us an enormous, an enormous opportunity for change.  And the United States is now a net exporter. 
Earlier this year, we inaugurated a new liquefied natural gas export terminal.  The first shipment left Louisiana for Brazil in February.  And now that the new Panama Canal expansion is up and running, there are even greater opportunities to supply the energy needs of our partners in Latin America and around the world if we make smart investments to upgrade our infrastructure, to accommodate post-Panamax ships, and to procure new LNG carriers.
In the Caribbean, where energy costs are the highest in the hemisphere because of the dependence on imported oil, this could be a game-changer.  I’ve met with Caribbean leaders twice last year to support their efforts to transition to cleaner, more affordable energy.  That’s why we launched the Caribbean Energy Security Initiative in 2014.  And since then we’ve seen important progress to diversify island energy supplies and start bringing down the costs -- a new deal to export natural gas to Jamaica; new geothermal power purchasing agreement in Nevis; new finance agreements and geothermal power plants in St. Vincent and the Grenadines; a restructured electrical grid in the Bahamas to speed the transition to a modern, diversified power system.
In Central America, we’re investing millions in development of their power sector -- including helping regional electricity suppliers develop clean energy plans and supporting efforts to maximize use of regional transmission line. 
In recent years, we’ve seen the volume of electricity traded across borders triple.  By creating a regional energy market, countries like El Salvador, Honduras, and Costa Rica -- they're bringing down costs by importing electricity from their neighbors rather than firing up their own thermal plants. 
This is critical because if Central American nations work together, the region can be a conduit that ties together the entire hemisphere -- integrating and connecting energy markets of the United States and Mexico through Colombia, Peru, and beyond.
And in South America, we’re working with partners from Argentina to Chile to Colombia to scale up renewable energy usage and to promote the safe and responsible development of unconventional oil and gas resources. 
Over 34 million people in the region still lack access to electricity.  If you go back and talk about the New Deal, the fundamental game changer for the United States of America was the Tennessee Valley Association [sic], bringing electricity to the heartland in the South, transforming America -- the American economy.
With smart choices and investments in energy and infrastructure, we can seize the same opportunity for the region.  We can lay the foundations for a secure energy future that will lift the fortunes of people throughout our hemisphere. 
And this brings me to my third point. For too long, Central America has been left out of the story of Latin America’s rise.  Central America is the hub uniting our region -- north and south.   But it is also the nexus of many of our biggest and most consequential regional challenges -- energy insecurity, corruption, crushing poverty, endemic violence, education systems that are lacking, transnational crime. 
We saw clearly the human cost of these challenges exactly two years ago, when of thousands of unaccompanied minors from Central America arrived at our southern border.  There’s only one reason why a parent would ever send their kid on a precarious journey, long and dangerous in the hands of a coyote or in the back of a rail car, and that's desperation.
What our nativists don't understand -- just like their parents, grandparents, great grandparents, great, great grandparents, it’s not like people sit around a rough-hewn, wooden table having a meager breakfast and say, you know, I got a great idea.  Let’s sell everything we have.  Let’s give it to a coyote or a criminal organization.  They're going to take us and drop us across the border in the middle of a desert in a country that says they don't want us, a language we don't speak.  Won’t this be fun?  Let’s go! 
It’s not part of my speech.  But I should add it here.  One of the reasons why we're the most innovative country in the world is we've had an unrelenting stream of immigrants picking -- cherry picking the most courageous, the brightest, the most adventuresome, the most optimistic because it takes an awful lot of courage to pick up and go.  They happen to be the people who caused the greatest consequential loss for their own country because they have this sense of “I’ll take a chance to make it better for my family.”  That's what built the United States of America. 
That's why we're the most unique country in the world.  You cannot define for me who an American is -- based on religion, ethnicity, race.  It’s an attitude.  It’s an attitude.  (Applause.)
So that’s why our administration has embraced a two-track approach -- offering relief for those in immediate danger, while also instituting long-range efforts to address the drivers of migration.  We’ve made it easier for vulnerable individuals in
Central America to be considered for resettlement programs while remaining in the region, rather than undertaking that dangerous journey north.  If they qualify, they can get here safely.  If they don't qualify, they should not have made the trip in the first place.  It’s too dangerous.
We’ve supported the United Nations and Costa Rica in forging agreements to set up temporary shelters for refugees escaping violence so they can wait safely while they are processed and screened for resettlement. 
And we’ve worked closely with our partners throughout the region to enhance their own border management, including at Mexico’s northern and southern border.  Mexico has stepped up and made a commitment. 
I was with one of their officials who I will not name now, and he said, the problem is people are crossing the border from the south.  They're staying in Mexico. 
I said, prosperity is a bear, isn’t it?  (Laughter.)  It really is tough.
But the truth is we're ensuring that those claiming refugee status receive the full legal consideration under international norms.
But our ultimate goal is for the people of Central America to build a future of hope and prosperity in their own countries so they never have to make that decision.  They never have to choose between the dangers of staying at home and the dangers of attempting to migrate north.  
That’s why we’ve built a comprehensive strategy with our partners in the Northern Triangle Countries -- Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador -- the Alliance for Prosperity to help them address the dynamics that have held them back for too long.  I don't know how many times I’d meet with the region, and they’d say, well, you did Plan Colombia when you were a senator.  We need a Plan Colombia for the region.
And our response was:  Understand for every dollar the United States put into Plan Colombia, Colombia put in $10.  Their political leadership made some very dangerous and consequential decisions to make it work.  And so we had multiple, multiple meetings -- detailed meetings.
I have a bad reputation for wanting to know the detail.  I mean it sincerely.  So it’s no longer hortatory language.  What are you going to commit to precisely?  When are you going to change the corrupt policing practices in the five neighborhoods that exist outside of A, B, or C?  Are you going to vet those police and let us help you vet them?  Are you going to change your court system, et cetera? 
And based on a series of firm commitments with absolute dates attached with the great help of the Inter-American Development Bank, we were able to convince the United States Congress to commit to another $750 million, on top of almost $400 million which you already have been spending.
But let me be absolutely clear:  This is a negotiated agreement among our countries to help eliminate corruption, provide transparency, reform their governments so they can grow their economies and enhance security under the equal application of the law.  They are the criteria that need to exist before the enormous potential of this region can be tapped.
As I’ve said, I’ve met -- I’ve spent many hours with the Northern Triangle Presidents.  We’ve met three times this year alone, and I’m meeting again this month.  And this is a two-way street.  They've also pledged $2.6 billion of their own money just this year to deliver the promise for prosperity, security, and governance.
There’s a long way to go.  I know there’s a lot of skeptics.  I know there’s a lot of skeptics.  Matter of fact, I can name 200 of them in the Congress.  (Laughter.)  But they took my word for it, and they went ahead and made the deal -- conditioned upon hard commitments as to what we were going to do.
On the security front, some of the initiatives we’ve instituted are already delivering benefits to the people of the region. 
For example, in Guatemala and Honduras -- Guatemala and El Salvador, in order to provide genuine security for all the citizens, they are now dealing with corrupt police departments by vetting -- going and vetting the whole -- that's what we did in Colombia, by the way -- by vetting these entire units, instituting community policing programs in neighborhoods that never saw a cop.  Never had any security provided by the government.  This generates a greater sense of community and a greater sense of commitment in their own country.  And instilling more confidence in the honesty and even-handedness of police organizations.  A long way to go, but it’s the first time in my 35 years I’ve seen any of it even begin.
We’re going to help eradicate transnational criminal networks that drive drug smuggling, human trafficking, and financial crime.  We already have a significant program worth tens of millions of dollars.  But we're doubling down on it.
And in order to succeed, we have to engage civil society groups, law enforcement, businesses, individual citizens.  I remember the first -- several years ago when the President asked me to take over this responsibility, I met with -- I won’t mention the specific country, the President and the Cabinet of one of these three countries, and then I said, I wanted to meet with civil society.  They said, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, wait a minute.  What do they have to do with anything?
I met with the chambers of commerce.  The businesses in those countries telling me what we had to do.  And I said, where the hell are investing your money?  You're not paying any taxes?  Where are you investing your money?
When X, Y, Z Corporation in Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador invests in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, instead of the United States or Europe, then you may be able to begin to change the environment where American companies who want to be engaged say, yes, it makes sense to invest here.
Everyone, including us, the United States, has to fight for the better future for this region.
I know the press always points out I’m always quoting Irish poets.  They think I do it because I’m Irish, which I am.  That's not the reason.  I do it because -- with all due respect to all of you -- they're the best poets in the world.  (Laughter.)  That's the reason I do it.  The Secretary knows that.
But one of my favorite quotes about us Irish was written by James Joyce.  And he wrote the following.  He said, “History is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake.”
If you know the history of the Irish people, you understand what he meant.  History is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake.  There are millions of people in the hemisphere trying to awake from the nightmare of the governments they’ve had to endure throughout the last century.   We can help them awake to a brighter day and in turn make our future look a hell of a lot better, too.
But I believe today we are at a dawning of a new era for the people of the hemisphere -- our hemisphere.  It should no longer be fettered by history.  We should not hesitate to work together, to dream big.  Our relationships in the region are stronger than they have ever been.  But this progress is still fragile.  And you all know it.  You know it better than I, many of you.  And it requires a sustained commitment by all the parties, particularly the United States.  We can’t wall ourselves off from problems that are not bound by borders -- the threat of communicable diseases like Zika, drug trafficking, climate change.  No wall can be built.  None that can do that.  (Applause.)
These challenges can only be met by a change in attitude and everybody doing their part and cooperating more with basic fundamental standards of behavior.  And the opportunities we’ve cultivated could slip away if we fail to follow through on our commitments, if we were to pull back from the region. 
We will only seize the incredible opportunities of this century.  We will only realize the full potential of this hemisphere if we stay at it.  We demand of our friends appropriate behavior, and we commit -- based on our capacity, which is immense -- to help them meet their needs.
We’re only going to rise together.  It sounds so trite to say it.  But that's literally true.  That’s what’s in the interests of the United States and the American people.  And that’s what we’ve worked toward every single day this administration has been in office.
And that’s what we’re going to keep pushing toward every day until we leave on January 21st.  And God willing, we’ll be succeeded by a woman who shares our view.  (Applause.)
So thank you all, and I’ll end where I began.  You have made a gigantic difference.  The people in this room have made a gigantic difference -- getting us to the point which I view as only, quite frankly, the beginning -- the beginning of an enormous potential.
God bless you all and may God protect our troops.  Thank you so very much.  (Applause.)
END            3:20 P.M. EDT
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 24, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at The National Library of Latvia
National Library of Latvia
Riga, Latvia
6:10 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  That's a graceful entrance.  (Laughter.)  I say to -- I don't often get to speak to three Presidents, twice in one day in the same room.  I want to thank them for their hospitality.  
 
And I say to -- Mr. Foreign Minister, thank you so much for your remarks, your opening remarks and your commitment to advancing the Alliance.
 
And, Dainis, your grandson the older he gets, the more he’s going to appreciate all you did for your country.  And you have -- as my father -- were here, he’d look at your grandson and say, Son, you have very good blood running in your veins.  
 
And I want to say thank you to all of you for not only dreaming dreams of independence, but for organizing the proud people of Latvia to ensure those dreams actually became a reality.  
 
I’m honored to share the stage with you.   And, ladies and gentlemen, your country has long stood at the crossroads of civilization.  This land, the link between north and south, part of the ancient trading route “from the Vikings to the Greeks.”  
A bridge between East and West.  
 
And, through it all, you’ve built an identity all of your own -- a unique language, an unerring conviction that Latvians deserve the same rights, to be treated with the same dignity of all other people on Earth.  
 
Even this beautiful building is a tribute to Latvia’s heritage.  The Castle of Light symbolized a sacred place in 
Latvian folklore, the home of all Latvia’s wisdom and learning.  
 
Until one day long ago, the Latvian -- with Latvia overrun by invaders, the Castle of Light sunk itself deep into the lake, as legend has it, and emerged again only when Latvia was free once more.  So I’m proud to stand here today, here in a free and independent Latvia, here in your modern-day Castle of Light.
 
And to be speaking to you on a day that bears such significance in the history of your nation and the history of the Baltic States.  As you pointed out, Mr. Minister, 77 years ago today, Hitler and Stalin made their secret pact to plot to deny the freedom of the Baltic nations and other nations throughout Central Europe.  
 
It was a day when the machinations of men sought to overthrow those God-given rights, which are equal inheritance of all humankind.  The years that followed were bitter and they were long.  But the people of Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania -- you survived and thrived. 
 
Fifty years later, standing together, you reclaimed this day.  No longer would August 23rd be a day of betrayal and infamy.  It would be a day when you showed the world -- and I mean this literally -- you showed the world the “Baltic Way”.  I remember as a member of the United States Senate that vision that was portrayed of 2 million people holding hands, hundreds of miles, forming an unbroken chain from each of your capitals, right here to Vilnius.  I was amazed at the time.  You inspired the world.  You inspired all oppressed people.    
 
The world saw the eternal, indomitable spirit of the Baltic people.  We saw the Castle of Light once more, alive in all of you.  And we saw you regain your freedom.  
 
And I’m proud to say that through every trial and every testing, the friendship between our peoples has never wavered.  When each of the Baltic States declared independence after the First World War, the United States recognized and welcomed Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania to the community of sovereign nations.  
 
And from that day to this day, your nations -- our nations -- have never, not for one minute enjoyed anything less than the full diplomatic recognition of the United States of America.  
 
Less than a year after the Nazi-Soviet pact, with just a few short paragraphs known as the Welles Declaration, the United States made it known that we did not and we would not accept Soviet occupation of Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania.  (Applause.) 
 
In some ways, the Welles Declaration was a simple restatement of American principles.  “The policy of this government is universally known,” it said.  And then went on to describe the policy in no uncertain terms:  “We believe in sovereignty and self-determination and territorial integrity.  We condemn predatory actions carried out by threats or force.”  
 
Nothing could be more straightforward.  It’s the same sentiment that I expressed on behalf of our administration just months after we were sworn in at the Munich Conference in 2009.  
What I said then holds true today.  I said:  The United States does not recognize spheres of influence.  
 
We believe “sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions, choose their own alliances.”  
 
That remains a universally known policy of my country.   The Welles Declaration laid out principles that would eventually be sealed by the Atlantic Charter, one of the foundations upon which our international system has been built from that moment on. 
 
And, for the Baltic peoples suffering the cruelties of occupation, it did something even more important.  It kept alive the ember of independence.  
 
Even when your nation’s flags could not fly here in Riga, even when they could not fly in Vilnius, even they could not fly in Tallinn, they waved proudly in Washington, D.C.  They never did not wave.  
 
Even when your language and traditions were pushed down, the world did not abandon the Baltic people.  And after the Baltic Way, after the barricades of old Riga when you finally, fully regained your cherished independence, you returned our faith in you by showing exactly what the people of Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania could accomplish.
 
In just a few short decades, the Baltic People have built true democracies.  You opened up economies that unleashed the ingenuity of your people.  You believed in the idea of Europe.  In my opinion, one of the most audacious and consequential visions of the past century -- the idea that after centuries of conflict, Europe could reinvent itself as an integrated community, one committed to political stability, the free flow of goods and people, and a solemn obligation to collective defense -- Europe whole, free, at peace.  You believed it.  You worked to be part of it.  And as one of your staunchest supporters, the United States, who fought hard for your admission to NATO, I know.  I watched.  It obviously wasn’t easy.  And it was never inevitable.  You earned it.  Implementing necessary economic reforms, building vibrant democracies, enhancing your defense capabilities, striving toward the standards of membership.
 
And those of us who always defended your right to self-governance were all the more proud to see you take your place as full allies in NATO and members of the Europe Union.
 
Today, the Baltic States stand as testament to the power of the European project.  Our belief in you, our commitment to keeping the door to membership open to all those who share our values and our commitments was critical, in my view, to your success.
 
It’s why the expansion of the Euro-Atlantic community has been one of the greatest forces in human history for advancing peace, prosperity, and democracy.  Not to mention security. 
 
And now not only are you a successful and integrated part of Europe, you're the example of nations set by the inspiration of all who seek to follow your path.
 
At a time when some question the continued belief in Europe integration, your nations are a powerful reminder how much more can be accomplished when we bring down the walls that hinder cooperation rather than erecting false divisions. 
 
And today of all days, we remember and celebrate the power of the “Baltic Way” -- the power of standing shoulder to shoulder, hand in hand.  That’s particularly true when it comes to your shared security.  The commitment we have made to one another to ensure our collective defense as allies in NATO has for decades been the cornerstone of global stability, and it remains so today.
 
Let there be no doubt:  America’s Article 5 commitment is rock-solid and unwavering.  We have made a sacred commitment.  Our honor has been pledged.  And we never, never fail to meet our commitments -- not just for now, but forever.  (Applause.)
 
President Obama believes that to his core and so do I.  And despite what you hear in this heated political season, there is a wide, deep bipartisan commitment to NATO in my country.  Don’t listen to that other fellow.  He knows not of what he speaks, and he doesn’t know of what he speaks.  
 
We will never forget that Article 5 was triggered for the first time after the United States was attacked on 9/11.  So America will never fail to defend our allies.  We will respond.  And with Russia once more taking aggressive actions and threatening the sovereign rights of its neighbors, NATO remains as vital today as it ever has been.  
 
Aggression still happens in Europe, and we must all be ready to answer that aggression.  That’s what Article 5 means -- we are all prepared to step up.  Not just the United States and the Baltic States, but all of us.  An attack on one is an attack on all.  Period.  End of sentence.  It’s that basic, it’s that simple.  And we want you to know, we want Moscow to know, that we mean what we say.  
 
We underlined that message last month at the NATO summit in Warsaw, when allied leaders decided to enhance NATO’s forward presence in the Baltic States and in Poland.  Canadian troops will take the lead here in Latvia.  German troops in Lithuania. British troops in Estonia.  And the United States will lead NATO’s presence in Poland.  
 
On top of this, the United States will send a full armored brigade combat team -- 4,200 combat-ready American troops -- to provide an on-the-ground deterrent force not only in Poland but for the region.  This brigade will be headquartered in Poland but they will be training and exercising here in the Baltics on a regular basis -- 170 exercises and security-cooperation activities are planned just in 2016.  This increase in American force, plus prepositioned equipment for another armored brigade combat team, and together with NATO’s enhanced forward presence, represents the greatest allied commitment capability deployed in the region since the end of the Cold War.  
 
And specifically in the Baltics, the United States has augmented our security and defense cooperation with more than $100 million in new assistance to help bolster your capabilities, build resilience, and deter aggression.  We’re improving our ability to work together, and your ability to interface with NATO defenses.  Just recently, we’ve delivered Javelin anti-tank missiles in Estonia, secure communications equipment in Lithuania, medium-range air defense radars right here in Latvia.  
And by the way, NATO has never been a one-way street of what America can do for our allies in Europe.  The United States gains enormous benefits from your membership in NATO.  We, the United States, are stronger.  We are more secure because of it.  Our entire ability to conduct our foreign policy worldwide rests on a Europe whole and free and secure.  It’s the basis upon which we’re able to project power anywhere else in the world.  And the Baltic States are among the leaders in demonstrating that commitment to our collective defense.  
 
Estonia is one of only a handful of allies spending the full 2 percent of their GDP on defense as requested by NATO.  Both Latvia and Lithuania are well on their way to meeting this benchmark by 2018.  Together, we’re taking important steps to strengthen all of our defenses and show a strong deterrent commitment so neither Russia, nor any other nation, can ever question the resolve or the capability of this Alliance.  
 
And because Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania know too well what it means to be deprived of your rights, because you know the high price to be paid when freedom is cut short, the Baltic States were also among the first voices to rally the international community in support of Ukraine’s democratic development and impose costs on Russia.  And we thank you for that.
 
As the Ukrainian people fight bravely to defend their democracy and independence, the Baltic States offer a powerful example and inspiration.  You are living proof that it is possible to break free and build strong, independent, vibrant democracies and to become full members of the European community.
 
At the same time, the future of Europe whole, free and at peace hinges on improving cooperation and integration across Europe, including here in the Baltic States.  Regional cooperation has been vital to the success of Latvia and all the Baltic States.  And regional cooperation is what brought me to Riga today.  
 
Earlier today, I attended the Baltic Summit, where we spoke about a broad range of issues where Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia are already working closely together, and how the United States can continue to foster the partnership among our nations.  So many challenges in a globalized century can only be met by acting hand in hand.  We are more efficient, we are more effective when we work together to mitigate cross-border threats, to strengthen our shared security environments.  That’s particularly true among close neighbors.  And together, the Baltic States have already done a great deal to advance your shared interests and shared values.    
 
Today, I was encouraged by the mutual resolve for the Baltic States to continue deepening your cooperation to improve border security, strengthen cyber-defense capabilities, foster more inclusive societies, grow strong and innovative economies that are built for the 21st century.  And I want to congratulate the people of Latvia on the milestone you reached earlier this year, joining the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.  It marks an important recognition of Latvia’s progress and heralds your place among advanced economies in the world.  
 
Another critical area where Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia will all benefit by continuing to work together is by strengthening energy security, as well.  Not long ago, this region was known as the “energy island,” cut off from the rest of Europe.  And the Baltics States know as well as any nation that -- national security consequences of being energy dependent.  You’ve lived it for the past 25 years.  
 
But recently, you’ve made significant progress in diversifying your energy sector to ensure you are no longer dependent on any one nation for your energy.  Here in Latvia, you’ve taken important steps to liberalize your gas sector, which will allow the formation of a fully integrated regional market in the Baltics.  And with the   of Lithuania’s liquefied natural gas terminal -- appropriately named “Independence” -- you took a huge leap forward to end the Baltic region’s energy reliance on Russia.  
 
It’s impressive.  The progress is impressive.  But there’s work still to be done.  It’s important you follow through on your efforts to diversify energy supplies and increase connections to Europe so that no country can use energy to undermine your sovereignty.  And the time to act is now, because this is a transformative moment in global energy markets.  
 
The United States and North America -- Mexico, the United States and Canada -- will be the energy epicenter for the 21st century -- in part to our abundance of natural gas.  We’ve moved from anticipating massive imports of liquefied natural gas to becoming the world’s fastest-growing exporter.  For the first time, gas from the United States is being used here in Europe.  And every country in Europe can now buy that American resource.  
 
That’s critical, because Europe needs diverse sources of gas -- not new pipelines that lock in greater reliance on Russia.  Russian gas can and should be part of the European market, but that market needs to be open and competitive.  Everyone has to play by the rules.  So we’re eager to continue working with our partners to help the region secure the energy future you deserve.
 
And finally, these steps will help keep the region moving forward with growing economies, thriving businesses -- a thriving business environments that invites investment, and inclusive, multiethnic societies.  But achieving this future requires the people of the region to continue to strengthen your democracies, building what we in the United States call “a more perfect union.”  We are still working on it ourselves.    
 
In democracy, it’s a civic duty to ensure governments are accountable to their citizens and not the narrow interests of the powerful.  The rule of law has to apply equally to everyone.  Justice systems must be equitable and efficient and transparent.  Otherwise, we will not attract international commerce and business.  And in a moment when Russia seeks to use corruption as a tool of coercion and influence around the globe, rooting out corruption is essential to preserve your national sovereignty.  It’s a cancer to the body politic.  It’s among the highest acts of patriotism to root it out.  It’s how you protect the future you have worked so diligently to build.  
 
That’s what those 2 million people joined hands for all those years ago.  Denounced and harassed by the Communist Party, her work banned, your great poet once wrote:  “That which passes must shout.  Must plead.  Must prove.  When it’s eternal, it can be kept silent.”  Such was the character and fortitude of the Latvian people.  Like your Estonian and Lithuanian brothers and sisters, you endured the shouts and rages of Soviet occupation, while the silent stones of Old Riga sheltered and sustained the Latvian spirit.  
 
You survived, confident of your enduring place in the world.  But even the eternal cannot stay silent forever in the face of indignities.  Eventually, you began to sing.  You sang the banned anthems of your people -- “God Bless Latvia,” “Sun, Thunder” -- and I’m not sure how to pronounce “Daugava.”  I mispronounced it.  I apologize.  You pulled Latvian flags from hiding.  You weathered -- Freedom Monument in flowers of defiance.  You took back your country.  
 
So today, as we celebrate the remarkable history of your nation -- the remarkable story of the Baltics -- we have to look to the future.  Let us reaffirm our shared belief in the unbroken human spirit and the yearning for freedom that unites all people.  Let us, together, build a future that lives up to our highest values.  And let us never doubt that whatever passing challenges we may face, no matter how much they shout or plead or seek to prove, the friendship between the Baltics and the American people is eternal.  
 
May God continue to bless your countries, and may God protect our troops and all those who safeguard our mutual freedom.  Thank you for having me.  (Applause.)
END  
6:35 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 19, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Conclusion of a Bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Vucic of Serbia
Palace of Serbia
Belgrade, the Republic of Serbia
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister, (inaudible). 
I’ll start again.  Thank you, very much Mr. Prime Minister.  And I told the Prime Minister as he greeted me at the limousine for that beautiful formal welcome, as they were playing the national anthems of both our countries, we stood on that platform.  As we walked away, I said, my expectation is your water polo team will be standing on a similar platform very soon.  And I’m glad to hear other of your countrymen are standing on that platform.
As you know, we in the United States -- we don't take it very seriously.  We don't pay much attention to gold medals.  I’m only kidding, obviously.  It’s a great scene to watch.  It makes you think as a leader who has been involved in national security issues and foreign policy for 40 years, imagine if we could settle all our differences the way they're settled at the Olympics and with the winners and losers embracing.
But, Mr. Prime Minister, you're going a long way to make your country a winner all the way around.  This is not the first time we've met.  Presumptuous of me to say this, I think we've become friends.  I always enjoy it when you're able to be in the United States.  
And I want to thank you for the welcome you’ve showed me at the airport.  You've made me seem like a very important grandfather to my 13-year-old granddaughter as she came down the stairs.  And so I want to thank you for that.
My visit today is much too short, but I believe we have accomplished a great deal.  The Prime Minister and I have gotten to know each other over the past several years, and I mean this sincerely, I -- along with President Obama -- respect the leadership you’ve shown in some very tough challenging moments, Mr. Prime Minister, and your positive vision for the future of Croatia [sic].
I’ll say what I said privately with your colleagues, I’ll say it again, I have for the last three decades viewed Croatia and all the rest of our neighbors -- Kosovo, Montenegro, everyone in the neighborhood -- as an essential part of what I think is needed for a Europe that is whole and free and united for the first time.  And Serbia is the keystone to that.
If Serbia does well economically and politically, the entire region does well and will do well.   And I’ve not worked on issues in this region for the -- at least the last four decades.  My first visit was back in 1997 [sic], before the breakup of Yugoslavia.  I was recounting one of the most fascinating meetings I’ve ever had in my life with President Tito in Split at his residence there with a gentleman named Averill Harriman, an esteemed American diplomat.  And I felt like I was reliving specific incidents in World War II.  They were both hard of hearing.  We were sitting a little dining room table, and they were hollering at each other so they could hear one another.  And to hear them talk about Franklin and Joe Stalin and Franklin Roosevelt, it was like something -- like history coming alive.  That was my first visit.  And I’ve been here a number of times since.
And I believe this -- today, this year, this period is a moment of genuine opportunity for Serbia.
I witnessed firsthand the incredible progress Serbia has made in a relatively short period of time.  And as I said when I visited back in 2009, the United States is committed to supporting the people of Serbia as you continue on your journey.  
We don't do that out of nobility.  We do that because it’s overwhelmingly in the self-interest of the United States of America for the people of Serbia to be able to grow and prosper.  I mean that sincerely.  I mean that sincerely.
And to support a strong, successful, democratic member of the Euro-Atlantic community is overwhelmingly -- not only in Serbia’s interest, as you've all stated, but is in the interest of Europe.  And it’s an interest of a Europe that is whole, free, and at peace.  
But, together, we are steadily working to change that circumstance into reality.  Serbia’s success and leadership is critical to the overall success, as I’ve mentioned earlier, of Southeastern Europe.  
There is a long history between our two countries, the United States and Serbia.  Not all of it good.  Some of it painful.  But I’m proud that the United States and Serbia 
have started a new chapter in our relationship, grounded on the shared ideas of mutual respect.  
And today, Mr. Prime Minister, you and I discussed how to continue to deepen that partnership between our nations. 
First, we discussed the importance of moving forward with an EU-facilitated Brussels Dialogue, so that Serbia and Kosovo can continue making progress to normalize relations.  It is difficult.  There is nothing easy about it.  There is a lot of history to overcome.
This is an issue that I’ll also be raising in Kosovo tomorrow with the leaders in Pristina.  As I said, it’s not easy.  It’s going to take a lot of hard work and political will to overcome the divisions.  But I’m convinced that you and your team have already and will continue to do all you can to bring it to fruition.
If both sides remain committed to a future of peace and greater prosperity, it’s going to help both nations move closer to joining the European Union.
And I commended the Prime Minister for his efforts to continue advancing broader regional reconciliation, including attending what he did last year at the 20th anniversary of Srebrenica and signing a Joint Declaration with the Croatian President.  It took a lot of courage.  It took a lot of leadership.  And it’s the measure of the man that I’ve come to know.
Secondly, we talked about the importance of Serbia continuing the path of reform.  I’ve said often around the world there is sort of a new physics almost of economic growth.  Not laid down by any country or any rules.  But there are certain things that have to exist for countries to prosper.  Because we're in a global economy, companies and individuals will not invest that there’s not transparency.  They will not invest where there’s not rule of law.  Not dictated by any country, not dictated by any international agreement.  It’s just a reality.  It’s just a reality.  
And the fact of the matter is that there is a considerable interest around the world and in the United States for further foreign direct investment in Serbia.  You have an extremely talented population, and you have an extremely, extremely hopeful future.
And so we expressed our commitment to implementing the reform agenda and the Serbian people -- that the Serbian people overwhelmingly voted for in April.  And the United States stands ready to help Serbia navigate the difficult road ahead.
Already we’re seeing the impact of the economic reforms that the Serbian government has put in place.  As the Prime Minister pointed out, the economy is growing and predicted to grow even faster.  You’re drawing more international investment, including from my country.  American companies are providing thousands of 
quality jobs for Serbian workers.  And our economic partnership is going to continue to grow as we keep strengthening our economic ties.  
We’re also seeing the impact reforms -- the reforms that have impact on advancing the relationship between Serbia and the European Union.  I congratulated Prime Minister Vucic on Serbia’s opening two more chapters in their accession negotiations with the EU.  It’s a critical step that commits Serbia to ensure equal access to justice, strengthening an independent judiciary, and resolve war crime cases.
The rule of law is the backbone of all successful democracies.  And very few democracies are successful without economic growth and economic prosperity.  And a free media and a vibrant civil society are essential components for allowing people to feel invested in their governments and communities.  Nations are stronger when they hear from many voices.  
Civil society is a vital source of new ideas and energy that can help a country advance and make sure that governments are accountable to the people they serve.  These voices must be protected and respected.
Serbian civil society can also be an important ally in rooting out corruption that hollows out institutions, weakens economies, siphons resources away from people.  And that is literally an act of patriotism when that occurs.
Third, we talked about all the ways Serbia and the 
United States can continue to advance our bilateral relationships.  Yesterday, we reached a new extradition treaty.  Not since 1902 has that occurred, the first upgrade of that agreement between our two countries in more than a century.  
This treaty will enable much more effective cooperation between our countries on law enforcement.  And what it says even more importantly is that the international norms that have become the standard for advanced countries are being shared between our countries.
The treaty, as I said, will enable more effective cooperation between our countries in law enforcement.  We also addressed the growing security cooperation.  Serbia and the United States already share a strong military-to-military relationship.  Our troops train together.  We stand together to combat terrorism of ISIL and other violent extremists.  And we share a commitment to global peacekeeping.  
And we continue expanding our ability to work together by helping Serbia modernize its military equipment, increasing Serbian military’s interoperability with NATO forces.   
And, in an issue that's very close to my heart, I’m encouraged that -- although we didn't have a chance to discuss it in our meeting -- that we're exploring opportunities to increase our joint efforts for cancer research and prevention and management so that we can end the scourge of cancer as we know it as part of my government’s so-called Cancer Moonshot.  We are really anxious to work with your scientists and your doctors, Mr. Prime Minister. 
And finally, today, the United States and Serbia have I think reached another point in the maturation of our agreement.  Even though we don't always agree on every issue, for many throughout the region, the scars of the wars in the 1990s are still raw.  The memories of lost loved ones are still fresh.  But I am hopeful that the steps we are taking to ensure future governments and future generations, I should say, grow up in the region marked by peace, stability, and greater prosperity. 
And that's why, Mr. Prime Minister, I appreciate the comments you just made taking responsibility, to the extent it existed, for wrongs, hoping other countries will take equal  responsibility for transgressions they may have engaged in, and offering your condolences of the lives lost --- Serbs and Kosovar Albanians alike.  This is an important, important step forward to healing.  It’s a difficult, difficult, difficult process.
And I would like to add my condolences to the families of those whose lives were lost during the wars of the ‘90s, including as a result of the NATO air campaign, in terms of responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Prime Minister, when I came to Belgrade in 2009, just a few months after President Obama and I took office, it was intended by the President and me to demonstrate to the people of Serbia America’s enduring commitment to the region and our desire for a strong relationship between our two nations.  
That’s the same reason I’m here today.  The only difference is we’ve even become closer friends since that first visit.
And over the past several years, Mr. Prime Minister, we’ve learned just how much we can achieve if we work together.  
So thank you and your colleagues once more for your partnership and your commitment to advancing the relationship.  And I am optimistic.  There are an awful lot of problems facing the region.  But I am optimistic -- maybe because I’ve been doing this such a long time.  And I’ve seen the progress that's moved as quickly as it has.
As long as we have leaders like you in the region, as long as we are committed to making progress, I am absolutely, positively convinced our publics will support the efforts we're making.  And things will continue to get better.
And thank you for your leadership, Mr. President. 
END  
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 19, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Conclusion of a Bilateral meeting With President Hashim Thaci of Kosovo
The Assembly Building
Pristina, the Republic of Kosovo
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I’ve been to Kosovo many times.  Looking at Mr. Ruganvic’s (ph) photograph or painting as I came down the stairs.  I’ve met with him many times, as well.  It goes back a long way.
And I always enjoy coming.  People back home ask me why I keep coming to Kosovo.  It’s because every time I come, particularly when I speak to you, Mr. President, I go back reinvigorated.  I go back hopeful.  I go back with the unyielding belief that years, decades, centuries of enmity and hostility can be overcome.  You and I were in a long conversation upstairs.  And President Obama always kids me because I keep saying, all politics is personal, particularly in international relations.  And you essentially said the same thing.  It takes personalities who are willing to fight very hard for what they know is in the interest of their country, even sometimes when it’s not in their own political interest.  And that always gives me hope.  It gives me hope.
And I will leave here today when I leave this evening with a renewed sense of hope and quite frankly feeling vindicated that I was smart enough to be captivated by all of you years ago and be among the first to argue for Kosovo’s independence.  You're making me a hero.  (Laughter.)  
But on a very serious note, this is a particularly meaningful visit for my family and me -- including my wife, Jill; my son Hunter, the love of my life; my two grandchildren, and Beau Biden’s wife, Hallie, and his two children.  
I wanted them to be here.  I wanted them to see Kosovo.  I wanted them to taste it.  I wanted them to feel it.  And when my Beau, who was the attorney general of my state and a fine man, and a decorated war veteran coming back from a year in Iraq, he volunteered back early on to come to Kosovo in the middle of the war.  The war was just ending.  And he came not as a soldier.  He came as a member of the United States Department of Justice to help, at the request of some, to advance justice and the rule of law here in Kosovo back in 2001.  
And he loved it here.  He grew to love the people.  I mean this sincerely.  He had an overwhelming sense of affection.  And it was his strong belief from having been here in the depths of very difficult times that made me confident that calling for the independence of this great country was the right thing to do.  Sometimes it’s better to listen to your sons than your sons to listen to you.
My father used to have an expression, Mr. Prime Minister -- I remember you as Prime Minister as well -- Mr. President, and that was he said, it’s a lucky parent who turns and looks at his child and realizes his child turned out better than he was.
I was, indeed, a successful parent because Beau was a better man than I am, and he sensed right away how important Kosovo should, could, and will be in the region.
So later this afternoon, as a consequence of the generosity of your parliament, you, and the Prime Minister, and the people of Kosovo, I will, with my family, be attending a ceremony to name a portion of the road in front of Camp Bondsteel after my Beau.  
And I want to thank you, Mr. President, and I want to thank the Prime Minister Mustafa, and all the people of Kosovo 
for the friendship that you have shown me personally, and to the 
Biden family generally.
And I don't -- this is not hyperbole to suggest we genuinely, genuinely, genuinely appreciate it.
You know, Mr. President, we've known each other for a long time.  And I’m here for an even much more important reason than merely to honor my son and to thank you for honoring him.
Let me begin by congratulating you on your election to President.  And I know from my experience and our many, many hours of discussions how deeply you care about Kosovo and how committed you are to its future as a free, open, independent, and full integrated European nation. 
There’s an expression I use in my country when young women or men will come to me and ask me if they're going to run for office.  They say, what’s the most important thing I have to know?  And I tell them -- and I mean this sincerely -- I tell them the same thing for the last 44 years, have you figured out what it’s worth losing over?  Have you figured out what is essentially more important than you as to the reason why you're doing what you're doing?  
You figured it out.  You put your country first, and it shows.  And the rest of the world is following your leadership.  
And I’m here today to affirm the United States is going to continue to stand with the people of Kosovo on your journey to become a prosperous and peaceful multi-ethnic democracy; and to join the Euro-Atlantic and international community.   
And by the way, I don't say that as the American saying we're coming here to help -- that's not what this is about.  This is overwhelmingly -- your success is overwhelmingly in the interest of my country.  Overwhelmingly.  For if you succeed, the region will succeed -- a region of Europe that has never been fully, thoroughly integrated into Europe.  
And our vision and the vision of most European leaders and the world is for Europe whole, free, and united.  And it matters a lot to the United States of America.
So although we're deeply engaged and we’ll do all we can to help, we're not doing you a favor.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest you succeed.
I was last here in 2009.  I remember at the time right after we got elected, I came here.  And they said, well, why is this among your first visits?  Why is it -- you've just been elected.  You've just been sworn in.  Why Kosovo?  
Well, it was just one year after you had gained your independence.  And it was a time in which we, the President and I and our administration, wanted to demonstrate that our commitment to is real.  It’s not passing.  It’s not something that is ephemeral.  It’s real.  Again, because it’s in our interest.
Now, seven years later, I’m proud to return to see the tremendous progress that Kosovo has made.  You’ve gained greater global recognition.  Every time you've come to my office, you've said, will you call the following Presidents, Joe?  He gives me a list when he comes as to what countries that hadn’t -- you know I’m not kidding.  But now -- not because of me or the United States -- but because of what you've done, you're in a position where the world is recognizing you.  You've gained greater global recognition, but you've also -- including competing under your own flag -- and Majlinda, you should meet this young woman.  She has to be strong to hold up that gold medal.  I lifted it.  I had my grandchildren lift it.  It must weigh I don't know what.  And fortunately, my young granddaughter, who is 12, said, Pop, what did she win it in?  I said, judo.  She said, like fighting?  I said, like judo, yes.  (Laughter.)  She said, boy, she must be strong.  But it was wonderful for you to have her at the airport to meet us.  You made me a hero with my grandchildren.
And as I said in my last visit, your democracy and independence are a force for regional stability.  There’s no going back.  If you nail down this independence and capacity to govern the way you're on your to doing, this will have an impact ripple throughout the region.  It’s not just about Kosovo.  And your firm commitment, as you stood here today, in spite of a strong minority -- a minority view that sometimes is somewhat over the top in not wanting you to sign the agreement you negotiated with Montenegro -- as an example of your leadership, standing here before your countrymen and the whole world and saying, this is important.  It is a fair agreement.  It is a fair agreement.  It is a fair agreement.  And your commitment to see it come to fruition will have a very positive impact in the region.
You’ve had to make some very difficult decisions and push necessary reforms -- even when they weren’t popular.  That's something President Obama and I know a little bit about, coming into office as you're losing 800,000 jobs a month is not a usual welcoming environment to come in.  But those decisions over the period of time have proven to be correct for our economy.  None of the easy decisions are usually consequential.  But the difficult decisions you've made that are unpopular are beginning to bear fruit.
I know that for many, the scars of war and the pain of loss are still very raw.  I was in and out of this region of the world in middle of the wars 28 times.  I witnessed it.  I saw it.  I was in shelters.  I was in bombed-out buildings.  I was visiting newspapers that were two stories underground.  I was visiting hospitals.  I saw with my own eyes only a portion of the suffering and the carnage that took place.  
But, although these scars are still raw, the only way for Kosovo to move forward is to assure a united future and to advance reconciliation -- to ensure the rights of every citizen is protected.  
Mr. President, I commend you for your participation in the wreath-laying at Staro Gracko -- I’m mispronouncing it, and I apologize -- last month, for honoring Kosovo-Serb victims of the violence of 1999.  And for your words yesterday, commemorating the children who were killed in 2003.  
I know these were controversial decisions in some quarters, but they are very important testimony to the progress that Kosovo is making under you and the leadership of your nation.
Today, with both the President and the Prime Minister, we talked about the necessary steps that lie ahead for Kosovo, and how the United States may be able to be of continued support and help in that march toward progress.
And it starts with pursuing closer cooperation and peaceful negotiations with your neighbor -- even your former enemies.  President Thaci and Prime Minister Mustafa have shown great commitment to advancing the EU-facilitated Brussels Dialogue with Serbia in order to move toward normalization of relations between Pristina and Belgrade; including not only the demarcation line, which is nothing to do with Brussels, but is kind of change that has to occur with your neighbors, in terms of the Brussels dialogue of moving forward to establish an Association of Serb-Majority Municipalities.  
It will be difficult, but it is necessary and important, urgent work.  And I had the same conversation, as I pointed out to you, Mr. President, with Prime Minister Vucic yesterday.  We talked about it at length.  And he understands, as he expressed to me, the need to move forward, as well.  Both of you face headwinds in your country on some of this, but you both understand what has to be done.  
Both sides have a responsibility to follow through on the commitments you made in Brussels and to look for new areas to keep the dialogue moving forward once that's done.  It can't be the end.  It should be the beginning.  This is critical for advancing Kosovo and Serbia’s full integration into Europe.  Without it, it will not likely happen.
And as you continue this work, the United States is going to continue to stand by your side, Mr. President, because we believe in Kosovo.  Since your independence, the United States has provided almost $2 billion of help, and there is more help available with continued change.  That $2 billion is used to promote governance and democracy, advance peace and security initiatives, implement social development programs, spur economic growth, and provide humanitarian relief.  
But ultimately, we hope to welcome a strong, democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo as a full member of the European family.  Because the use of violence and intimidation to disrupt lawful democratic processes, some of which you've seen here, are completely, thoroughly, totally unacceptable. 
 
Another key issue President Thaci and the Prime Minister and I discussed today was need for greater economic growth and prosperity across Kosovo.  If you look at history, folks, no fledgling democracy has been able to sustain itself without economic prosperity, without economic growth.  And economic growth cannot be sustained in the absence of the rule of law.  It’s not because the United States says that or because the U.N. -- it’s because -- there’s sort of new laws of physics for the economy.  People will only invest where there is transparency.  Companies will invest only where they know there is a rule of law.  They’ll only invest where they know what they negotiated can be litigated and upheld within those courts of law; will only invest where they don't have to engage in bribery and coercion.  That is the new norm for our global economy.  
And in order for you to take advantage of the incredible talent you have here interests his country, there is a need to continue, which you have been pushing, to deal with corruption and organized crime.  
That’s why it’s absolutely critical that the government continue fight impunity by closing loopholes in the criminal code; professionalize public appointments and take zero-tolerance approach to corruption; including preventing indicted and convicted officials from continuing in their positions; and increase the democratic accountability of the government.
Corruption is a cancer that eats at the fabric of every society where it exists.  And that's not hyperbole.  I spend my time on behalf of the President going around the world trying to be of some value added.  We not -- we always don't make it.  But every country that is riven with corruption as a consequence of the last government that has -- that they've been able to overthrow or move away from is struggling.  They're struggling economically.  Corruption is a cancer.  And unless it’s dealt with, the likelihood of bringing down the unemployment rate, the likelihood of raising the standard of living, the likelihood of Kosovo meeting its potential is not likely.
And so ultimately we hope to welcome a strong, as I said, democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo as a full member of the European family, free of corruption.  But the use of violence, as I said, and intimidation is something that is not tolerable in any modern democracy. 
Corruption drains the economic resources away from the people and drives away business and investment.  It weakens a nation’s ability to defend itself.  It leaves it vulnerable to manipulation from outside.  In short, it jeopardizes everything Kosovo hopes to achieve, hopes to achieve, hopes to become, hopes for its future.  The rule of law has to apply equally to everyone.  The justice system has to be equitable, and it has to be transparent.  
That’s why in the first instance in 2001, my son Beau came here to work toward that kind of system, long before Kosovo achieved independence.  And that’s what we encouraged -- we're encouraged by the people like you who believe that we have to continue to move in this direction so a future for themselves and their families can be achieved here in Kosovo -- and people stop leaving and start coming back, instead of leaving.
Kosovo is not alone.  You have friends ready to help all over the world -- and no greater friend than the United States of America.  We want to help you transform your economy, reduce poverty, and promote a more prosperous future for the people of Kosovo and the children of Kosovo.
That’s why, last December, the Millennium Challenge Corporation selected Kosovo to create a new development assistance compact between our nations.  That could potentially provide hundreds of millions of dollars -- direct dollars to Kosovo -- to help foster a better environment for business growth and to draw outside investment, which will create urgently needed jobs. 
We want to help strengthen your energy security, as well.  That’s why we support the construction of the new Kosovo C power plant, which will provide Kosovo with reliable power and unlock economic growth.
We want to continue cooperating to advance our shared security, and that's why you made reference it a little bit earlier, that's why, Mr. President, we want to compliment as President and the Prime Minister on the important work that you've done to combat the flow of foreign fighters.  You have done it.  I want the world to listen.  They have done it.  We know they have done it.  They have been highly, highly successful.  And it matters.
It took incredible fortitude and resilience over many years for the people of Kosovo to gain their independence.  But that was only the first step.  Much of the hard work still lies ahead.   You're going to continue to need to draw on your courage, Mr. President, and determination to meet these challenges.  All of your countrymen are going to have to do that.
The work of democracy is never done.  We know -- 240 years after our independence, the United States of America still works daily toward what we call “a more perfect union.”  And we are not there yet.  We are still dealing with our own problems internally.
So as you continue to make progress on your democratic path, know the United States is going to continue to be champion for the people of Kosovo.  And we will keep advocating around the world in every international organization for a strong and independent Kosovo that is an integral part of a Europe whole, free and at peace. 
And with your leadership and the leadership of the Prime Minister and all of your colleagues, I am absolutely confident this is a path you can walk.  This is a path you can walk down.  This is an objective you can achieve.  And when you do fully achieve it, Mr. President, every single country in the region will be better for it.
So thank you for all your hard work and your courage in moving forward.
END 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 17, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at The Dedication Ceremony of The Joseph R. “Beau” Biden III Highway
Camp Bondsteel
Gjilan, Kosovo
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, thank you, thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  You cannot only call me Joe, you can call me anytime you need me.  
And, Mr. President, I was thinking about it on the way out here -- it was 2001 when I came to Bondsteel with my son and I met you in Pristina that year.  And both you and the Prime Minister have made every American who has had faith in Kosovo proud.  Your joint commitment to establish a true, genuine democracy, where every single person is entitled to be treated with dignity, shows through.  And it has taken great courage to get where you've gotten so far and there's further to go, but I know you will go there.
And, President Jahjaga, I want to thank you.  Gentlemen, I like you a lot, but she's a hell of a lot better-looking than you -- (laughter) -- and she likes me a lot and I like her a lot, too.  Thank you for coming into my office six or eight months ago, before the last election, and telling me what the plans were.  And I appreciate it a great deal.
And, Mr. Mayor, -- both the mayors -- Beau would be so proud -- is so proud that this road connects two great cities.
And Beau, when he came here, fell in love with this country, like I have.  Look at this magnificent country.  (Applause.)  No, I mean it.  I remember going home, and Jill will remember, my talking about how magnificent and beautiful it was and what it meant.  And all she wanted to know was, is Beau safe?  
Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, citizens of the Republic of Kosovo, you've been sitting a long time in the hot sun here.  If I were smart, which I'm not, I'd say thank you and sit down and let you all go.  But on behalf of the Biden family -- Beau's mom, Jill, and Beau's sister -- my sister, Beau's second mother, Aunt Val, who is here with me, and Beau's brother, the love of my life, Hunter Biden, who has had Beau's back every single moment Beau was alive.  And to his beautiful, brave, and I mean this sincerely, courageous wife, Hallie, and to my two grandchildren, Hunter and Natalie.  You said it right, Mr. Prime Minister, this is sort of a bittersweet moment.  We are extremely, extremely, extremely grateful and we're humbled beyond words.  
But the fact of the matter is, I visited this region many, many years ago -- I was a young United States senator and my first visit was back in the mid-'70s.  And my first place I came after being elected Vice President was I came back as Vice President of the United States to Kosovo because I so, so deeply believe in the prospects and the promise of the people of Kosovo and this country for the first time, maybe the first time ever, to be able to establish the kind of country that the people deserve.
But one of the most meaningful visits was in 2001.  It was January, it was winter, and I was trying to explain to my staff -- I said I was -- I remember driving out here from Pristina, Bondsteel was just being built.  It was a rainy, rainy January cold day in 2001.  And we were going up a hill, and one of my staff members said there's no hills out there, and I said, oh yes there are.  They'd only landed on the tarmac and took off -- they didn't see it.
And we're going up, and I'm not sure exactly which hill, but it looked like it was over there, and it was muddy and it was a rainy, rainy day.  And I remember going up the mountain and the tires were spinning in the truck we were in.  And I had a Kosovar driver, Mr. President, and we got to two-thirds of the way to the top of the hill and there was a guard post with a white and red stanchion that came down across to block our way.  And as we talked to be checked, our Kosovar driver who had been driving me for two days, who'd become a friend, looked out the window like this, he said, look, look, America.  And he was pointing to the cranes and the bulldozers and all that was going on.
And, Mr. Prime Minister, I pointed to the guard shack, and I said, no, no, there's America.  And when I looked over, there was a young, Caucasian -- white sergeant.  Standing next to that young sergeant was a black man -- excuse me, a Hispanic man who was a master sergeant.  Standing next to him -- this is the truth -- was a light bird colonel, a woman, and standing next to her was a full bird colonel, African American.  And I said, that's America.  That's America.  (Applause.)
And until every region of the world understands that we're one people -- and we're still working on it, by the way, in America.  We talked about we're working on a more perfect union -- we're not there yet.  We're still working on it.  But that's my memory.  And Beau was with me at the time in the backseat of that automobile, and he threw himself into his work here.  He didn't tell his mother or I as a member of the federal Justice Department in Washington that he had volunteered to be the one federal representative here in Pristina helping put together the training programs for local judges and prosecutors, and laying the groundwork for what would become Kosovo's Judicial Institute, which I'm told still operates to this very day.  
At that time, when the wounds of war were fresh and the landscape was still scarred, still scarred with abandoned vehicles and earth that had been blown up, at that time, Kosovo's justice system had been hollowed out by decades of totalitarian rule.  And Beau played a small part, but he played a part, in making sure that the war crimes were prosecuted and, most importantly, from his perspective, prosecuted based on hard evidence, not on emotion -- on hard evidence, not emotion.  He helped introduce and develop for the first time in Kosovo's legal system, a system built on what we call the adversarial model, where the role of the prosecutor is not just to prosecute but to do justice -- to do justice.  And the accused is entitled to a defense, no matter how reprehensible the accused may be.  
I have always been proud of him, but I was never more proud of him than when I was here with him at Bondsteel.  He and his brother are cut from the same cloth -- men of courage.  My mother had an expression that applies to my son, Hunter, and his brother, Beau.  She said, remember, Joe, you're defined by your courage and you're redeemed by your loyalty.  You're defined by your courage and redeemed by your loyalty.  I think that's why we both have come to love this country so much.  He not only threw himself into his work -- (applause) -- but he really did come to love the people, the cultures, the history of this incredible country. 
Since then, I've thought a lot about that trip 15 years ago.  Mr. President, I said that's when we first met.  You weren't President, I wasn't Vice President, but we knew we'd be working together a long time later, didn't we?  For real.  
I also had the honor of meeting Dr. Ibrahim Rugova, a fine man, a gentle man, a brilliant man, a national hero, who we lost to cancer.  (Applause.)  And he was a national hero.  
I remember Beau and I flying to western Kosovo to meet with Father Janjic at the magnificent 14th-century Orthodox Monastery in Decani.
But maybe, as I said, what I remember most was our trip up this hill to what's become an enduring monument to KFOR and America's commitment to the freedom and independence of Kosovo.  It was a beautiful day, and we got to meet an awful lot of you guys in uniform.  And I can't tell you that after this was all over and Beau went back after being a prosecutor, gentlemen, we hold you responsible, your predecessors -- because one day, after he was home about three months, I got a phone call, Mr. President, from my son.  I was commuting down to Washington, D.C. for business.  And he said, Dad, where will you be Friday at noon?  
And whenever Hunter or Beau says that to me I know they want me to be somewhere Friday at noon.  And I said, where do you want me?  And he gave me an address to show up, and I said, what am I doing there, honey?  He said, you're going to pin my bars on me to become a lieutenant in the United States Army.
He later told us all why he wanted to do that.  It was because of the example of all of you guys here and women here at Bondsteel, because he ended up coming out here often.  Coming out here often.  He saw what was to be done at Bondsteel and he wanted to be part of it.
You know, I look how far this great country has come in 15 years -- a free and independent nation recognized by the community of nations; sustained by free elections and a developing economy; on the path to European integration.  And as the world watched in Rio, the flag with six stars and a golden Kosovo was raised for the first time in history at the Olympics Games.  (Applause.)  And congratulations to all of those -- and also -- (applause) -- Majlinda.  Majlinda, where are you?  Are you out here?  I was told you were going to be here.  I'm not sure she is here.  But if Majlinda is here -- she made me a hero.  As we get off the plane, the President had her with me last night wearing her gold medal.  Now my grandchildren know I'm important because I got to introduce her and let them actually feel the heft of that gold medal.  Your nation is so proud of you and we're all proud of you.
You should all be proud of all of the progress you've made so far.  But its continuance depends upon a country truly committed to justice and equality.  And the talk you just gave, Mr. President, is clear proof that you're committed to every aspect of that.  The truth of the matter is that you are, I've said and I'll say it again, you are, in fact, you, Kosovo, when you succeed fully, it will benefit the entire region.  It's not just Kosovo that will benefit -- the entire region.
Kosovo is a young country, but not too young to know what its citizens need and what its citizens deserve.  That the basic values of integrity, service, merit, not privilege, are required both of the governed and those who govern.  Put another way, in the words of my son at the time, he said, and I quote, “The rule of law is a maxim of equality -- everyone subject to the same laws at the same and consequences for breaking those laws.  This maxim dictates that -- without exception -- no one is above the law, no one is below it.  It doesn’t just apply to people. It applies to businesses, institutions, elected officials, and the judiciary.”
That's exactly what you're working toward, gentlemen, and it matters.  It matters.  And when, in fact, you fully accomplish it, as I said, you will not only revolutionize what's happening here in Kosovo, but in the entire Balkans.
True democracy is ongoing.  It requires constant work.  Every citizen has a duty to vote, to be engaged, to look out for one another.  And while we don't know how much time we have on Earth, we do know we have an obligation to make every second of it matter, to make every second count, to leave it better than we found it for our children.  
And as a family, that's why we decided that the best way forward is to give meaning to the things Beau lived for.  I did a major television program back in Washington -- back in the United States, watched by millions of people.  And the host was very empathetic toward my son and we talked about all that we lost.  And I came home and my son, Hunter, looked at me and he said, Dad, from this point on, we've got to focus on what we gained.  We've got to focus on what Beau was about and devote our lives to making fulfilled what he fought so hard for.
That's how Hunter and I -- that's how my family views this day.  That's how we view what we're about -- to know that five, 10, 20, 60 years from now, my grandchildren, my great-grandchildren, my great-great-grandchildren because I assure you, every Biden born will make the trip.  Every Biden born will make the trip to see that monument to their father, grandfather, great-grandfather, and great-great grandfather.  (Applause.)
And the people of Kosovo I've gotten to know over the last 40 years, I've seen you.  And like Beau, I believe in you.  I believe -- I believe not only that you can, that you will build an enduring, free, democratic and prosperous Kosovo -- a country that meets the hopes and dreams of the Kosovar people so long denied -- so long in abeyance, but once fully established, will last for centuries and we'll all be better for it.
We love you.  Thank you for this great honor.  And I say to the American troops, I'm proud of you.  The finest fighting force in the history of the world, and we're proud of what you're doing here.  (Applause.)
God bless you all and may God protect our troops.  Thank you.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 21, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and New Zealand Prime Minister John Key
Government House
Auckland, New Zealand
PRIME MINISTER KEY:  Okay, so good morning.  Can I start by acknowledging the Vice President?  We’re delighted to have you in New Zealand, sir.  And it’s great to have you here.  
The relationship between New Zealand and the United States continues to strengthen, and your visit further reinforces the long-standing friendship between our two countries.  We have just concluded a very useful meeting where we covered a number of international issues of shared interest. 
We spoke about our commitment to working together to address some of the significant threats to international peace and security that we face today – in particular, the threat of ISIL, its brand of terrorism, and its incitement to violence against innocent civilians is of significant concern.
The recent attacks in Nice, Brussels, Baghdad and Florida are just some of the horrific examples of why we need to work together in the global effort to defeat ISIL.
New Zealand recently extended our training deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan.  These compliment the extensive efforts of the United States and others to counter the threat of international terrorism and to assist governments in the Middle East to bring stability to their countries.
We discussed the ongoing tragic events in Syria, and I acknowledged the efforts of the United States to bring some stability back to that country.  New Zealand is doing all it can in its role on the U.N. Security Council to support the people of Syria.  
The Asia Pacific region is of particular focus for both countries, and we talked about how we might be able to cooperate further, in particular on security capacity building.
New Zealand is looking to increase its efforts in the region on countering violent extremism, preventing the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, and stopping the financing of terrorism.  
I welcome the increased attention the United States is paying to this part of the world.  New Zealand’s commitment to playing its part in strengthening global security was also reflected in recent discussions and decisions to increase funding for our intelligence and defense capabilities.
The Vice President also confirmed that the United States has accepted our invitation to participate in the 75th Anniversary of the Royal New Zealand Navy and intends to send a ship to these celebrations.  I’m naturally and obviously pleased that they’ve accepted.
The International Naval Review is an important occasion for us, and we hope to have many of our friends here to celebrate alongside us.  Both countries and both governments also remain committed to advancing trade opportunities.  We discussed our respective progress towards ratifying TPP, as well as the importance of the agreement and helping to lead economic integration efforts in the region. 
We were also able to discuss more technical bilateral issues affecting trade, including New Zealand’s desire to see an improvement in business visa access to the United States. 
My recent trip to Europe and the UK and Indonesia also featured including the trade opportunities and challenges as a result of Brexit.  And we discussed last week’s Arbitration Tribunal decision on the South China Sea.  While New Zealand does not take a position on the various territorial claims, we have consistently said that the differing interests in the region should be managed peacefully and in accordance with international law.  It is New Zealand’s view that it’s in all parties’ interests to ensure that the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea is respected.  And we hope that the tribunal’s ruling can provide a platform for resolving these issues. 
New Zealand and the United States are both committed to supporting efforts to find peaceful solutions to these long-standing and very complex issues. 
Finally, I explained the Vice President why New Zealand believes Helen Clark is the best candidate for the U.N. Secretary General’s role.  This firmly held view is based on her track record as Prime Minister of New Zealand and her leadership of the UNDP.  We believe she would bring strong and pragmatic leadership to the organization and an ability to work constructively with the U.N. membership.
So today has been a valuable opportunity to discuss a range of issues of importance to both countries.  I’d like to thank the Vice President for taking time to visit New Zealand.  The friendship between our two countries reflects our common values and shared interests, and the relationship has never been stronger.
Thank you once again.  Mr. Vice President, I offer the opportunity to speak.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  And by the way, I’m not going home.  (Laughter.)  What a beautiful, beautiful, beautiful country.  You have a beautiful setting.
Good afternoon, everyone.  I am so pleased to be here in New Zealand.  And I want to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for the welcome you extended to me and to my granddaughters who are with me.  And I’m also honored to receive a tradition Maori welcome before our meeting.  They made me a genuine hero with my granddaughters.  And earlier today, I got to meet a few real New Zealand heroes – two of the members of the All Blacks.  I am a – 400 years ago I played rugby when I was in law school, and I played college – American football.  And I was telling them, the two representatives of the All Blacks that came to see me this morning, Mr. Prime Minister, that my brother was a rugby player, as well.  And one day when I was a young senator during a recess period, he said, the All Blacks are playing four matches in Ireland.  And so we packed up, and we followed them all through Ireland.  There was nothing but carnage left behind.  (Laughter.)  But I am a real fan.
And I also want to extend my appreciation to all the people of New Zealand for the incredible hospitality our very short visit has generated.
The United States and New Zealand, as the Prime Minister pointed out, have made incredible progress in our bilateral relationship during the Obama-Biden administration with you, Mr. Prime Minister.  And we signed early on the Wellington Declaration in 2010, and two years later, the Washington delegation – the Washington Declaration to rebuild closer ties between our nations.  
And today we take another major step to further our friendships.  It’s with great pleasure and honor, Mr. Prime Minister, the United States does accept – gladly accepts the invitation to send a ship to the Royal New Zealand Navy’s 75th celebration this November.  And it will be another expression of our close and cooperative relationship between both of our countries that we’ve worked together so hard to strengthen.
Mr. Prime Minister, we both discussed, as you point out, a wide range of issues where New Zealand and the United States are working together as we speak; starting with economic cooperation.  Our trade and our investment relationship is steadily growing.  We’re doing more business together, investing more in each other’s countries.  And together, we have led the way in creating high-standard trading agreements that are necessary to uphold the liberal economic order of this new century; agreements that protect workers’ rights, preserve the environment, and significantly safeguard intellectual property.  
And the vast economic potential here in the Asia Pacific exists, and this is – my guess is the 21st century will be marked by the progress made in the Asia Pacific region.  But unlocking it depends on how well we manage differences that exist in the region peacefully and how we maintain stability that is essential to economic growth.
That’s why both of our nations have issued statements – urging China and Philippines to abide the Arbitration Tribunal’s ruling last week regarding the South China Sea.  And both our nations understand that continued peace and prosperity in Asia is incumbent upon our ability to protect the environment.  So New Zealand and the United States are working together to put this plan on a more sustainable path, to address climate change, and to also increase our role with the goal you have so significantly set of renewable energy – 81 percent of our energy is now renewable.  That far exceeds where we are, but is a goal that we are attempting to achieve, as well.
On the security front, the Prime Minister and I reiterated our commitment to work as partners to promote peace and provide humanitarian assistance and disaster relief throughout the region.  Together, we are strengthening the region’s ability to address challenges both through multilateral institutions.  New Zealand is an incredibly valuable partner in the U.N. Security Council, a committed contributor to the counter-ISIL coalition.  And we stand united against the evil that these terrorists promote around the world.
And I said somewhat humorously to Prime Minister that I wish we had the partisan zeal – nonpartisan zeal that you have.  If the potential nominee for – become Secretary General could hear what the opposition had to say, I was impressed.  I thought she was his sister.  (Laughter.)  It was amazing.  But all kidding aside we have very high regard for your nominee, and she is one that is being closely considered.
PRIME MINISTER KEY:  Good.  
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  But the most important connection between our nations has always been our people.  Americans and Kiwis are cut from the same cloth fiercely independent and tenacious.  And if you excuse, as we used to say in the United States Senate, a point of personal privilege, I grew up hearing about the Kiwis from my grandfather Finnegan, who lost one of his sons in New Guinea and another son came back very badly injured.  But every time the Kiwis were mentioned, he literally would straighten his shoulders, and the same with the Aussies.  The regard that New Zealand is held in in the United States – I doubt whether any of you who’ve visited the United States have ever, ever received anything other than a warm welcome.  There is a real genuine affection for New Zealand in the United States.
My only hope is that there’s a significant affection for the United States here.  
But we don’t always agree.  But what we do is we share the same basic values of promoting freedom, equality, and opportunity.  
And it’s that kinship of spirit that drives our nations’ desire – and capacity – to work together to make the world a better place.  And presumptuous of me to say but I think that’s exactly what we’re doing together. 
From scientific research we conduct together in the Antarctic, to our shared efforts to protect the Ross Sea.  From our commitment to promoting democracy and good governance around the world, to our shared efforts to end the scourge of violence against women, our nations accomplish more because we’re moving together.  It matters.  The whole is bigger than the sum of the parts when we cooperate, Mr. Prime Minister. 
And on this trip I traveled first to Hawaii, and I joined a trilateral meeting with our Japanese and South Korean allies and observed our ongoing Rim of the Pacific exercises; to Australia after that where I discussed everything from security cooperation around the world to our shared fight to end cancer as we know it.  And we signed three memorandums of understanding on cancer cooperation and the Moonshot that the President is initiating at home; and to New Zealand where the Prime Minister and I have once reaffirmed our commitment to expanding this relationship between our two nations.  
It’s been from our perspective an outstanding trip.  And at every stop I have framed to our closest partners in the region the incredible importance that the United States places in the Asia Pacific.  We are a Pacific nation.  The United States is a Pacific nation.  We are not going anywhere.  We are here to stay.  And we will continue to work closely with all of our friends throughout the region because there’s such overwhelming potential from China to New Zealand, from India to Japan.  There’s such enormous potential in this region.
It’s been a productive visit, an important opportunity to celebrate what unites all of our people.  And I believe that our nations are only going to grow closer as we continue to work together in the 21st century.  
I said to the Prime Minister and his colleagues as we met, this is the hundredth anniversary of William Butler Yeats’ poem Easter Sunday 1916, which commemorates the First Rising in the 20th century in Ireland.  And there’s a line in Yeats’ poem that he used to describe his Ireland at the moment, but I think better describes the world as we greet it today and why it’s so important we stand shoulder-to-shoulder.
He said, “All’s changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.”  
The world has significantly changed in the last 15 years.  We have a chance.  And great moments of change, which have only occurred in the last century and a half on three occasions, when it occurs, we have a chance to mold the next 10, 20, 30, 40 years if we’re smart, if we work hard, if we, in fact, act with likeminded nations who share the same values of democracy, openness, working together.  
And so, Mr. President – excuse me, I just demoted you.  Mr. Prime Minister, thank you –
PRIME MINISTER KEY:  You might have promoted me – the country. 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you, thank you so much for the hospitality.  And may God bless our countries and may Got protect our troops.  Thank you so very, very much.
Q    Mr. Vice President, will you take a couple of questions?
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Apparently that’s not on the agenda, but why don’t you shout something on your way out.  
Q  (Inaudible)?
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  I do.  I think in the lame duck session we have a real chance for that happening.  The lame duck means after this general election takes place in November and before the Congress adjourns.  I’m hopeful.  Thank you. 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 20, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on the Future of the U.S.-Australian Relationship in Asia
Paddington Town Hall
Sydney, Australia
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  We have an expression in American politics, as the Prime Ministers know -- that if my mother were she’d wonder who you were talking about and my father would have believed it. 
Good afternoon, everyone.  And I want to thank you, Simon and Michael, for this warm welcome.  And I want to thank everyone at the U.S. Centre at the University of Sydney and at the Lowy Institute for organizing this opportunity for me to speak here today. 
And I want to say at the start to acknowledge the Traditional Owners of this beautiful land, the First Australians,
the oldest continuous culture in the world, and to pay our respects to their Elders, past and present. 
It is not hyperbole to suggest I’m truly honored that several of your former Prime Ministers are here this morning.  My service in government overlaps each of their services -- much less consequential, my service to theirs.  But I watched with great interest, pride, and satisfaction how this chain, how this link between the United States and Australia was husbanded by each of you.  And it’s an overwhelming testament to your great hospitality here that the three of you would be here to hear me speak.
Prime Minister Hawke, Prime Minister Howard, Prime Minister Abbott, I want to thank you for your contributions to the strengthening of our relationship of our two nations during each of your tenures. 
Over the past few days -- both here in Sydney and in Melbourne -- I’ve had the opportunity to speak with Australians from all walks of life.   At the stadium, I was with World War II veterans and active duty Australian Defence Forces here; cancer researchers and conservation experts; entrepreneurs striking out to start their own ventures and factory workers contributing to the global manufacturing operation. 
1Like Americans, Australians all have different hopes and different dreams, different worries about the future, but there’s something they all have in common.  And I’m not talking about the borderline obsession with Australian Rules Football. 
The ambassador and I enjoyed our stay there.  He kept looking at me like, do I understand what’s going on?  (Laughter.)  I understood.  I had watched matches on television before.  I played American college football and in law school, I played rugby.  And I turned to one of my granddaughters who was with me, my 12-year-old, and I said -- I had her watch a game before we went to the game.  And she said, Pop, it’s kind of like basketball because you bounce the ball when you run.  It’s kind of like basketball, soccer, rugby, football.  And, Pop, the end of the field is oval -- it’s kind of like ice hockey.  (Laughter.)  So it is one incredible sport requiring incredible athleticism.  And I had a chance to see one of the games.
But that's not what I’m talking about.  I’m talking about character.  In my view, Australians are defined by their character; by the grit, their integrity, their unyielding resilience that has shaped this nation from the very beginning. 
And it’s that character, in my view, which has always drawn Australians and Americans together -- because we recognize it I believe in one another.
In December 1941, besieged by war, facing an advancing enemy, Prime Minister John Curtain issued the now-famous message to the Australian people, a message that declared an intention to close the distance between our two nations and bridge the wide Pacific. 
He said:  Without inhibitions of any kind … Australia looks to America. 
Australia looked to America, and a generation of Americans—including two of my uncles responded.  Both in New Guinea -- one killed and one went home badly injured.
Australia opened her hearth and her heart to the 1st Marine Division after Guadalcanal, including Ambassador Berry’s 19-year-old father.  And they found rest and embrace in Australia, camping on the Melbourne Cricket Grounds.  I read when I spoke to this veterans’ group, I read some of the letters that were written.  One of the letters from a Marine who made it off of Guadalcanal onto that field for rest said the thing he looked forward to the most and he appreciated the most was the “love and the embrace” of the Australian people.  Not words often used by U.S. Marines.
They spoke of Australia as a second home.  And to this day, the 1st Marine Division, a proud, proud division of our United States Marine Corps deploys to Waltzing Matilda.  
Over the course of 100 years spent fighting side by side, over 65 years of a formal alliance, although every testing -- through every testing we have faced as a nation, Australians and Americans have built an unsurpassed partnership.  Our peoples joined in easy mateship.  The history that forged the foundations of our alliance in iron and baptized it in blood has long bound the fortunes of our two nations. 
But I didn’t fly all the way from Washington to revel in past glories.  And it’s important that nostalgia not be the defining feature of our partnership.  I’m here because that partnership is a living connection between our two countries -- as vital in our current era of change and uncertainty as it was a century ago in the trenches of World War I, as it was 75 years ago when together we defeated the forces of fascism.  Our alliance has been shaped by progress of our shared home in the Asia Pacific.  And it’s been for decades -- underwriting stability, seeding commerce, laying the groundwork for this region to reach its great potential. 
And here in the early years of what surely will be the
Pacific century, it’s critical that America and Australia continue to look to one another for mutual support.  Because together I am absolutely confident we can write a better future for all our children and for this whole region.
That’s why President Obama came to Australia five years ago once we decided on our policy of rebalance to Asia.  In his address to the Parliament in Canberra, he declared before the world:  “In the Asia Pacific in the 21st century, the United States of America is all in.”  The United States is all in.
And we’ve made good on that promise and continue to make good on that promise.  We’ve shown our commitment to lead in the region over and over again. 
Anyone who questions America’s dedication and staying power in the Asia Pacific simply is not paying attention. 
Our commitment to our military strength is unparalleled.  We continue to outpace our competitors, spending more on our overall defense than the next eight nations in the world combined.  We have the most capable ground forces in the world, an unmatched ability to project naval and air power to any and every corner of the globe and simultaneously.  We’ve bolstered our special operations forces, enhanced our cyber and space capabilities, invested in game-changing technologies in order to maintain our qualitative edge for years to come.   And we’ve committed to put over 60 percent of our fleet and our most advanced military capabilities in the Pacific by 2020. 
At the same time, we’re stronger and more effective when we work side-by-side with our closest and most trusted partners, with those nations who share our interests, our concerns, and our commitment to upholding a rules-based international order. 
That means, even as we continue to address the full range of persistent challenges and immediate threats to our shared security, the United States has kept -- and will keep -- a laser focus on the future in the Asia Pacific.  We're not doing anyone any favors.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest.  Overwhelmingly.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest that Australia continue to grow, succeed, and prosper.
We’ve worked closely with our democratic partners throughout the Pacific to strengthen our historic alliances, to intensify our cooperation with not only Australia, but with Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Philippines.
We’ve upgraded our capacity to address the challenges of our more complex security environment, and we've done it together -- counterterrorism, cyber security, nuclear proliferation. 
And today, our partnership with our allies and other security partners in the Pacific are stronger than they have ever been, especially here in Australia, where our military interoperability and our intelligence cooperation -- being part of the Five Eyes -- are at an all-time high.   We share everything.  We have made unprecedented investments to strengthen our partnerships in Southeast Asia -- joining the East Asia Summit, the region’s premier leaders-level forum for political and strategic issues; supporting a democratic transition in Burma; rebuilding our relationship with Vietnam. 
And, since 2010 we’ve invested $4 billion in development assistance in ASEAN countries alone.
Across the region, we’ve worked with our partners to write high-standard trade agreements and to protect the rights of workers, preserve the environment, uphold intellectual property rights -- the kinds of agreements that support broad-based economic growth and keep the engines of our global economy running.
We’ve made important progress to center our growing relationship with China in enhanced cooperation and responsible competition.  There is no doubt that the United States of America
is a Pacific nation.  I’ve spent a great deal of time with President Xi, a lot of time.  I’ve traveled with him five days in China.  I’ve probably spent more time with him alone than any world leader.  And when he asked me why we were so engaged, I pointed out, we are a Pacific nation.  That's who we are.  And will maintain that posture as long as we exist.
I made that point, I’ve said President Xi directly what I said to president -- with Prime Minister Turnbull yesterday:  Our resolve to play a part in shaping the future of this dynamic region is real.  As the President said, we are all in.  We are not going anywhere. 
And that’s vital, because our presence in the region -- and it sounds terrible to say coming from the lips of an American elected official -- our presence in the region is essential to maintaining peace and stability, without which the economic growth and prosperity I believe would falter.  America is the lynchpin.  And we want to ensure the sea lanes are secure and the skies remain open. 
That’s how to maintain the free flow of commerce that is the lifeblood of this region.  And that’s the only way our nations will be able to grow and succeed together.  And if we get this right, which we can -- as my grandfather would say, with the grace of God and the good will of the neighbors.
We have an incredible opportunity to shape the future of our world in ways that will make it better for billions of people.  
And, by the way, the reason we’re able to make these commitments, is because the United States of America has the strongest economy in the world.  I read your editorials.  I read editorials around the world.  The question was who we are, do we have the staying power?  Do we have the economic capacity?  This is not being arrogant, it’s just a fact.
Over the past seven-and-a-half years, President Obama and I have led the country from economic crisis to recovery to resurgence.  We made some very tough choices, and they’ve paid off.  Since the Great Recession, our economy has grown 20 times faster than Europe’s and 100 times faster than Japan.  We have created more jobs than every other industrialized nation in the world combined.
I say that not to brag, but to reassure.  The United States is going to remain the strongest economy in the world.  Because we have solid foundations -- like you do.  Our economy is destined to drive sustained growth.  We have vast energy resources.  The epicenter of energy for the 21st century is North America -- is North America.  It’s not the Arabian Peninsula or Nigeria or Venezuela.  And we want them to do well.  But we have resources like you even greater of human capital. 
Our workers are among the most productive in the world.  We have the best research universities in the world.  And we foster a culture of entrepreneurship and innovation and risk-taking that is unrivaled anywhere in the world.  As I said yesterday, a young man when Steve Jobs was speaking at Stanford University said, Mr. Jobs, what do I have to do to be more like you?  He said, think different.
Think different.  You can only think different where you can breathe free air.  You can only think different where you don't worship at the shrine of orthodoxy.  That's the similarity we both have.
So if I had to bet on which country is going to lead economically in the 21st century, you might expect me, I’d bet on the United States.  But I’d put it another way:  It’s never been a good bet to bet against the United States.  It’s never been a good bet to bet against the United States.
The partnership between Australia and America is at the core of our vision for the region’s future.  It’s not what we can do for Australia.  It’s what we can do with Australia.  Ours is a partnership of possibilities built on inherent potential that pulses through the veins our people.   
We are nations of explorers and dreamers who have never backed down from a challenge.  Never ever have your people ever backed down from a challenge, nor have ours.  We believe barriers were meant to be broken and frontiers to be furthered. 
Your great novelist Patrick White wrote:  “The map?  I will first make it.”
The map?  I will first make it.  That's what you all are made of.  And it’s that kinship of spirit that shared refusal to be bound by orthodoxy, a belief that ordinary people can do extraordinary things if given an opportunity.  It’s the nature of our immigrant past and present.  I think it’s what makes the United States and Australia natural partners as we take on the biggest challenges of our times. 
This is the hundredth-year anniversary of William Butler Yeats’ poem Easter Sunday 1916, and the Rising in Ireland.  There’s a line in the poem he used to try to describe the changes that were taking place in his Ireland that I think better describe the world we face together today than it did his Ireland.  He said:  “All’s changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.” 
All has changed in the last 15 years and how we adapt to that change is going to determine the future of both our nations and the future for our children and grandchildren.
Here in the Pacific, we’ve seen it borne out that commerce and free markets are the most powerful engines for lifting people out of poverty and growing the middle class -- from China to Australia, from India to the Philippines.
On Monday, I visited the Boeing factory in Melbourne where they’re making wing flaps for the 787 Dreamliner, truly high-tech, specialized manufacturing.  One hundred years ago -- not long after humans mastered the mechanism of flight -- Boeing started building planes.  Not long after that, they started doing business here in Australia.  It’s a powerful example of our enduring economic ties.  Today, Melbourne is the home to the largest Boeing factory outside the United States.  And together we are quite literally building the future of aviation.   
But our economic relationship is not just the story of corporate giants.  It’s the story of scrappy start-ups and unlikely successes, of ideas that take wing because, instead of asking why?, Australians and Americans ask why not?  Why can we not do that?
That’s the story of the Australians I’ve met this week.  I met a young man who transformed his experience as an engineer in the Royal Navy into a business that provides funding and technical assistance to help launch other start-ups, including connecting with them with American investors and collaborators.
And as we seek to expand prosperity and opportunity to more people around the world, we will be more successful with more links crossing the Pacific, links that connect Sydney and Silicon Valley, Brisbane and Brooklyn. 
In Melbourne, I visited the new Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre, where you invested $1 billion -- a $1 billion commitment to provide the best possible care to patients and at the same time to improve access exponentially to treatments. 
I’m very proud that our nations have signed three memorandums of understanding that will increase collaboration between Australia and the United States and accelerate a project very close to my heart, the project the President put me in charge of, our Moonshot Initiative, to end cancer as we know it; to do in five years what otherwise would take 10 to 15 years.  Probably every one of you have been touched by cancer -- a family member, yourself, a worker that you work with.  And you know every extra day, every extra week, every extra month matters to someone facing a terminal prognosis.  Just give me one month to give my daughter way in marriage.  Just allow me to stay another six to see my grandchild graduate.  Just give me a little more time to finish this business arrangement so my wife or my husband will not be left bereft financially as well as emotionally.
Our enhanced collaboration is going to make data available
on a clinical phenotype for 60,000 cancer patients, while protecting their privacy. 
And that means researchers around the world will better be able to understand what causes a particular cancer, how to target those cancers and develop more effective treatments, and how to keep those cancers from returning.  We now have access to Big Data.  We can do a million billion calculations per second.  Let me say that again.  We can do as I speak a million billion calculations per second.  And within the next three years, our Department of Energy will be able to do a billion billion calculations per second, opening up a vista that was beyond comprehension even 10 years ago.
The research our nations are doing together will quite literally reach the cellular level as we enhance our understanding of how proteogenomics impacts cancer progression and treatment outcomes.  That's what you're doing in Melbourne. 
And it stretches out billions of miles into our galaxy
as we unlock the mysteries of our universe.  Earlier this month, on July the 4th, NASA successfully slipped the Juno aircraft [sic] into orbit around Jupiter.  This complex mission, planned in meticulous detail over the course of many years, was only possible because of a critical investment here in Australia -- in collaboration with your science research agency -- to install two new satellite dishes as part of the Deep Space Network. 
The Juno mission linked expert engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, with Australian scientists at the Canberra Deep Space Communications Complex --with the largest planet in our solar system.  
This is only the latest example of where Australia and America are charging forward together to the next frontiers as we always have -- with skill, determination, and little bit of luck.
I don’t think any of our leaders could have envisioned how rapidly our technologies, our economies, or our world would change when they signed the ANZUS treaty 65 years ago.  But they understood then, as we do now, that our ability to ensure security in this vital region undergirds everything our nations hope to accomplish. 
Without secure sea lanes and open skies, commerce cannot thrive.   Without peace and stability between our nations, among our nations, cooperation can’t flourish.  Without basic human security, girls and boys across the region will never have the chance to achieve their full potential. 
Over the past few days, I’ve met with Prime Minister Turnbull, Foreign Minister Bishop, and Labor Party Leader Shorten.  We discussed a full range of issues on which
Australia and the United States stand together. 
And because of the concerted effort that our two governments have made to prioritize this partnership -- across leaders and political parties -- our alliance is stronger than ever.  Built with the foundations laid by the three Prime Ministers sitting in front of me.  And it is an alliance that's equipped for the future. 
On my way here, I flew to the USS John C Stennis aircraft carrier.  And I sat in the Admiral’s chair on the flag bridge and observed the biennial Rim of the Pacific exercise.  It’s the largest, international maritime military exercise in the world, and the world has ever seen, covering scenarios from missile threats, to piracy, from search and rescue, to disaster responses.  The full range of challenges together we face in the 21st century. 
It exists because 25 years ago, under your administration, Prime Minister, the United States and Canada and Australia understood the importance of meeting the threats to the stability in the Pacific as a united, interoperable front.  From that core idea, the exercise has grown to include 27 participating nations -- truly spanning the entire rim of the Pacific -- more than 25,000 military personnel, with Australia continuing to play an anchoring role.
And our cooperation goes far beyond RIMPAC.  In fact, when I met with the head of U.S. Pacific Command in Hawaii, Admiral Harry Harris, the first person he wanted me to meet with in private -- and the first person he wanted me to meet with was Major General Greg Bilton a two-star general in the Australian Army who is embedded in our chain of command.  As in, he commands American troops.  He has direct command over American troops.  It will not surprise you we don’t let that happen very often.  (Laughter.)  But it’s because of the competence, capability, and the faith we have in the Australian military.  
And yesterday, here in Australia, I met with Australian troops on the HMAS Adelaide right out here in Sydney Harbor.  I not only spoke to the crew and the commanders, but on board were roughly 30 Australian military troops that had just or not long ago returned from fighting alongside American forces in Iraq and in Syria. 
These men and women are not only the pride of our nations, they’re the heart of our enduring commitment to ensure there is
no daylight between our fighting forces.  Whether we are taking the fight to al-Qaeda, ISIL, or Daesh, as they say in the Arab countries, or all those and any people who threaten our safety, the safety of our peoples.  Whether we are standing together to maintain peace and stability in Asia, or whether we are working side-by-side to provide humanitarian assistance in the Pacific Islands, Australia and the United States have each others’ backs.
And I said earlier that two of my uncles fought with Aussies in the region, in New Guinea.  And every time my grandfather Finnegan, the name of Australia would come up, my grandfather who was elderly by this time and lost his son, would literally straighten.  You could see him, his body language.  He would straighten his shoulders.  And three generations later, my son, a major in the United States Army, highly decorated who I just lost, when he talked about who Americans wanted to have their back in 2008, 2009 when he was there, he talked about the Aussies.  I thought that was pretty -- on a personal basis a continuum from 1943 to 2012.
Ours is a partnership that reminds us of what is best in ourselves, even as we acknowledges that as nations, we have not always lived up to our best values.  Both our nations have characters strengthened by generations of courageous immigrants
who arrived from somewhere else.  But their spirit and energy sustains and has sustained us and renewed us as nations since our founding.  Both our nations -- America and Australia alike -- continue to grapple with the freighted legacies of racism and exclusion that shaped some of our past, but which still leave behind too many of our citizens.  But we've always overcome.  We grapple.  We strive.  We speak out, and we seek change.
And because of the commitment of our citizens to our most fundamental values -- because of you -- we move inexorably forward.  So don't worry about our election.  (Laughter.)  Don't worry about our election.  The better angels in America will prevail. 
So at a time like this, when the forces of xenophobia, nationalism and demagoguery are once again being trumpeted around the world, including in my country, when reactionary politicians seek to erode those values our nations hold most dear -- tolerance, equality, opportunity for all -- we have to remember who we are as Australians and as Americans, and reflect our best selves back to the world. 
We are people who insist with passion and conviction that basic human dignity cannot be denied to any man, or woman, or child on this Earth.  That's the core of who we are.  We never bend.  We never bow. 
That’s why, like the United States, Australia is leading a major effort to end the terrible scourge of violence against women.  Even at the footy match I attended on Sunday, one of the teams was making respect and family violence prevention a central commitment of their club.  It’s a cause that I’ve been leading in the United States for decades.  Sadly, we still have a lot more work to do to change the culture in both our nations.  But we can and we will.
My father used to have an expression -- and I think he would have the same expression where he an Aussie -- I really mean this.  He said, the worst sin a man or woman can commit is the abuse of power -- whether it’s political, economic, or physical.  And he’d say the cardinal sin of all sins was a man raising his hand to a woman or a child.
In both Australia and the United States, if you look at our history, our neighborhoods, the abuse of power is viewed with abhorrence by our people.  Equality really is the watchword.  And though we sometimes stumble, we keep taking steps to extend true equality to more and more people.
I’m extremely proud of the work our administration has done to advance the rights of the LGBT community in the United States, to celebrate the lives and loves of all Americans. 
And recently in Australia, both Victoria and New South Wales issued historic apologies for the past mistreatment of LGBT individuals under the law.  It’s a powerful gesture that sets the stage to move forward, so that institutionalized discrimination and mistreatment of the community can never happen again. 
And both our nations continue to look for ways to expand opportunity and inclusion when it comes to the original inhabitants of our lands -- Native Americans, Indian Nations in America, the Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander  of this great continent. 
So we not only share the same values, we understand that talk is cheap.   In our Constitution we use the phrase “in order to form a more perfect union” -- we mean it.  We have a long way to go.  But it’s in order to form a “more perfect union”.  We've been willing to stand up for our values, make the changes we wish to see in the world a reality. 
   On this trip, I brought along three of my granddaughters.  The two older ones are fully informed.  They're 18 and 22.  One recently graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, about to go to graduate school in international relations.  The other will be a senior.  But I also brought along my deceased son Beau’s 12-year-old daughter.  Because I wanted her and them to see firsthand the energy and the spirit of this incredible country.  And that's not hyperbole.  I’m being literal.
I want them to understand who the Australian people are, and why the partnership between our two proud nations is so strong.  When I think about the future we are creating, when I imagine the maps we are first making, I think of them -- like I suspect you do, as well. 
Like so many of the young people in this audience today, they’re incredibly bright and curious about our world, a world no longer circumscribed by borders and distance.  And it is my hope for them, for young people everywhere is that they never experience any limitations whatsoever on their dreams.  They're taught to never, never, never, never, never, never give up.  No matter how life intervenes.
That’s the future we’re working together to bring about.  And I leave Australia more optimistic than ever about the enormous potential that exists in our world, so much of it right here in the Asia Pacific, to take the arc of history in our hands
And just bend it, just a little bit, just a little bit.  Great change only occurs if there’s inflection points.  And we're at one of those points right now.  I absolutely firmly believe we can bend it to a brighter tomorrow. 
As my grandfather would say, I didn't fall off the turnip truck yesterday.  I’ve been around a long time.  Our partnership encompasses all the infinite talents of our people, our drive to achieve and innovate, our commitment to uphold justice and equality, our innate animated conviction that every human being in the planet deserves a fair go. 
It’s a partnership of possibilities, a partnership about the future, a partnership about progress.  That's what brings us together.  And that's what I’ve seen every stop along this trip and what I’ve experienced in my 44-year career.  And that's why I know that the great friendship between our two nations will not diminish.  It will grow stronger with every generation. 
I thank you for your indulgence in listening to me, and I’ll end by saying may God protect our troops because we stand together.  Thank you, thank you, thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 19, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden After a Bilateral Meeting Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull
Commonwealth Government Office
Sydney, Australia
3:39 P.M. (Local)
PRIME MINISTER TURNBULL:  Good afternoon.  And, Mr. Vice President, it’s been great to talk with you and discuss so many important issues, strategic issues, economic issues.  But above all, welcome to Australia. 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER TURNBULL:  Foreign Minister Julie Bishop and I are delighted to be hosting you today.
We spoke at the outset of our meeting about the values that bind Australia and the United States.  We talked about a hundred years of shared service of our servicemen and women fighting alongside each other in freedom’s cause.  But we talked above all at the outset, the way in which our two countries define their national identities by a commitment to shared political values -- to freedom, democracy, and the rule of law.  We don't define what is an Australian, who is an Australian, who is an American by reference to religion or race or ethnic background or cultural background; it is that shared passion of our two nations that the people of Australia and the people of the United States to freedom, the rule of law, democracy and the right of every person to be able to aspire to realize their dreams -- every single one of us, born equal entitled to the same protection of a free country governed by its own laws. 
So we have no stronger alliance, no stronger friendship across every sector, the economy, foreign policy, defense.  And we work closely together in freedom’s cause around the world.
The Vice President and I, with the Foreign Minister and our advisers, talked about the need to ensure the rule of law is supported everywhere -- in the Middle East, where the Vice President has particular expertise.  And I’ll touch on that in a moment. 
We talked about the important of the rule of law in our region, in the South China Sea where neither of our countries being claimants to any features in the South China Sea, but each of us encourage all parties to resolve such differences as there are in accordance with international law, in accordance with peaceful negotiation.
The rules-based international order, which, Mr. Vice President, the United States has underpinned for so many decades has enabled the development of so much prosperity, so many millions -- hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty because of the peace that a rules-based international order in our region has enable.  And we stand for that today, as we always have.
We discussed the recent military progress against ISIL in the Iraq and Syrian theaters.  As the Vice President acknowledged, Australia is one of the largest contributors to that allied effort. 
We talked about the concerns that we see with the spread of fast developing terrorist activity, rapid radicalization, as seen in recent attacks in Nice and Orlando, as well as in Indonesia, Malaysia, and many other countries.  We have the strongest and most intimate collaboration in intelligence and security.  And it becomes stronger all the time.  The threat of terror is a global one.  It is absolutely international.  And every even is connected one with the other.  And so our collaboration is more important than ever.
And in regard to Iraq, which I hope the Vice President will speak about in his remarks, where you visited 28 times, Mr. Vice President.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  A lot.
PRIME MINISTER TURNBULL:  Yes, a lot.  I can announce that we will expand the training mandate of our Building Partner Capacity Mission in Iraq to include the training of Iraqi federal law enforcement agencies and local police.
At the moment, our training mandate is restricted to training the Iraqi army.  And as we discussed, one of the most important objectives now in Iraq is to ensure that the Iraqi police forces, their gendarmerie forces are able to maintain the peace in areas that have been liberated from Daesh or ISIL as the Iraq Security Forces and counterterrorism forces progress.
We talked also about the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  This is a great free trade agreement, 40 percent of the global economy.  The United States and Australia are partners in that.  We await the approval of the U.S. Congress to it.  And we know that while there are political obstacles, the eloquence of the Vice President and the President, all of the wiles he’s developed over so many years in the Congress, all of that political capital is going to be brought to bear to bring the TPP home in the Congress.  We know that the Biden touch will deliver the TPP, and that will be very important for economic growth in our region.
So, Mr. Vice President, you've come here for the first time but with a great family connection, of which you spoke.  You've come here with your characteristic warmth and eloquence, with your passion about finding a cure for cancer, your commitment to that.  You come here demonstrating your commitment to the alliance, talking to our servicemen and women, sharing their stories, visiting Australians at every walk of life.  But what you deliver most of all, Mr. Vice President, is yourself.  You deliver your warmth and your passion for those values of freedom that bind our two nations together.  And we are delighted to have you here as our guest in Australia with your family.  We're delighted.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  It’s not hard when you believe it.
Well, good afternoon, everyone.  It’s a delight to be here, and it’s a real pleasure to be in Australia.  And I mean that seriously.
Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for the incredible welcome and the undeserved words of praise that you have shown me, the welcome, and what you've said. 
The warmth and the hospitality of the Australian people these past few days have been overwhelming.  My whole staff -- some have been here before -- feel it.  You can smell it.  You can taste it.  It really is -- it is welcoming.
And let me start, Mr. Prime Minister, by congratulating you on your recent victory.  And I’m proud to have this opportunity to celebrate and strengthen the relationship which is incredibly important not just to me and the President, but to all the American people. 
Those of you in the press who have been to the United States, I doubt whether any of you will say anything contrary to what I’m about to acknowledge, and that is if you find an American who isn’t welcoming of an Australian, I’d like to know where it is.  There is an overwhelming sense of -- it’s almost unreal of camaraderie and connectedness to Australia, even though it’s a world away, as they say. 
And so it’s not just that we have fought side by side for the past hundred years in every major encounter, and for the last 65 years we've had a formal military alliance, but it’s the daily touches of family, of relationships, of friendships, of partnerships, of shared values.  And I really mean it when I say shared values.  We're both nations of immigrants.  We are both nations who are fiercely independent.  And we defend fiercely -- to use the word twice -- the right of everyone to be treated with dignity and with respect.
I don't know any place where there’s a greater comfort zone that we feel than being here among all of you, and I hope you feel the same way when you're in the States.
And ultimately, I think there’s a simple reason our country works so well together, across the board, our values are the same.  We have a line in our Constitution say:  “In order for form a more perfect union.”  We are constantly trying to improve.  We don't always succeed.  We're constantly trying to improve on our country’s success, but on how we deal with one another and deal with the world, to make a more perfect union.
And I believe to our core that we share the view that freedom and equality are about what we're about. 
Now that sounds almost corny.  It’s phrases you’d expect public officials, elected officials to say, but you guys feel it in your bones:  We hold these truths self-evident that all men are created equal, endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, the right to life, liberty, pursuit of happiness.  It’s in your DNA.  You feel it.  It’s real.  And that's why you're so respected by Americans.
Over the past few days, Mr. Prime Minister, I met with many business leaders and entrepreneurs discussing how our two nations can continue to grow and drive innovation and economic growth in the 21st century.  And I toured the Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre, in Melbourne, where you've must made a billion dollar investment, providing the best possible care and treatment and analysis that is a quality that's equal to any in the world.  And I met with Australian researchers, doctors, scientists, oncologists who are on the leading edge of cancer research, particularly in proteogenomics, which is -- as I used a metaphor -- it’s like the genes are the full roster of a basketball team.  The proteins are the team you're going to play against and the five that you put on the court.  And you’re on the leading edge in what is going to be part of a breakthrough to change and alter cancer, as we know it.
And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Prime Minister, that we've signed three memorandums of understanding between our two nations to do more together, to share data, to accelerate our progress to end cancer.
And look, and I’ll make you a prediction, Mr. Prime Minister, that the MOU that we signed is going to become the model -- literally the model -- for sharing data and information around the world, which is not happening now.  The more rapidly it happens, the more quickly we’ll be able to get to the causes of and the cures for.
And I predict that you're going to see this repeated around the world.  It’s a great honor, as well, that I had to meet with Australian veterans.  Your Foreign Minister was with me, or I was with her more accurately at the stadium.  And it included a World War II vet that was head of the organization.  And we were part of the Return and Service League of Australia.  And he was a gentleman who acted like he was in his 50s, but he was a World War II vet.
And the fact is that I got an opportunity to return a refurbished 48 Stars and Stripes, an American flag which had been taken ashore on Guadalcanal, a very costly battle which we prevailed in -- all of us -- and which for 60 years has found a home in Melbourne with the RSL. 
And today I was aboard the HMAS Adelaide in Sydney Harbor.  And I got a real sense of how our alliance, and quite frankly, the genuine brotherhood that exists between our people.  Not only did I speak to the crew, but to my left were assembled roughly 30 veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan fighting side by side with my son and others like my son who spent time in both of those theaters.
And it’s a genuine camaraderie.  It’s a genuine sense of knowing, as my son said in Iraq, that you know there’s an Aussie with you, they always have your back.  I mean that sincerely. 
And I want to speak very briefly to your additional commitment in Iraq to train -- not only continue to train their counterterrorism force, but also to train their police.  Your folks are the best trainers in the world.  Your special operations forces have come in, taken on the responsibility of training the guts and the core of the Iraqi National Security Force, their counterterrorism force.  You are part of the reason why they succeeded in Ramadi.  And you will be part of the reason why the training you're providing to the police -- and they're talking about a significant number of police needed to stay behind to reconstruct and keep safety and security in areas that have been reclaimed from ISIS, from Daesh, as they say.
And I can't tell you how much your commitment is appreciated.  I spent a lot of time on the phone and in person with Prime Minister Abadi.  He invited you.  He invited you to do this because he knows, he understands your guys and women are the best.  They're the best in the world at doing this.
So the fact is that today the Prime Minister and I spoke about a full range of issues affecting the U.S.-Australian bilateral relationship.  And we discussed the regional and global issues that we both confront and confront together.
To start with, we talked about how we can continue to strengthen our robust economic ties that exist between our two countries.  The trade between our two countries -- the trade agreement signed more than a decade ago has served as a foundational basis upon which to grow trade and fortify business investment between our countries. 
Last year the two-way trade between our nations in goods and services topped $60 billion.  And our economic partnership has never been more important.  We talked about the need for our two nations to continue to set the economic rules of the road with high-standard trade agreements to protect the rights of workers, preserve the environment, and uphold intellectual property rights.  That's the basis upon which the 21st century rules of the road must be based.
And Australia and the United States, as well, are both Pacific nations.  I’m often asked whether I’m with President Xi in Beijing or whether I’m in Tokyo or whether I’m anywhere in this region -- we are a Pacific power.  The United States is a Pacific power.  We are going nowhere.  We are going nowhere.
And we believe we have been part of, along with Australia, the basis for stability, regional stability that's allowed everyone to grow -- from China, to Japan, to Korea, to Australia -- across the board, allowing everyone to grow.  Stability is the basis upon which economic prosperity is founded.
And we share a clear understanding of the importance of maintaining that stability throughout the Asia Pacific region.
Mr. Prime Minister and I, we reaffirmed our commitment to continue to work together to uphold the liberal international order that has served the world so well for the past 75 years, and to maintain the free flow of commerce and trade in the air and on sea, making sure the sea lanes are open and the skies are free for navigation.  They are the lifeblood lines of commerce and the economic growth worldwide.
That's why last week both our nations issued strong statements urging China and the Philippines to abide by the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision with regard to the South China Sea.
We also discussed the steps that Australia and the United States are taking so our troops can train more together and increase our interoperability so that we are fully prepared to respond to any challenges in the Pacific with a united front.  It’s important we stand together. 
The Prime Minister and I also reinforced our shared commitment to wiping out ISIL’s evil and countering terrorism around the world.  Australian and American troops are working side by side in Iraq, as I said, training local partners to lead the fight on the ground.  And we are flying missions over Syria, leading the global humanitarian effort to provide aid to those stranded folks who find themselves caught in a nether land, and to provide the necessary relief for millions of refugees and innocents who are caught in the crossfire, suffering very badly in Syria.
Our alliance has been the source of incredible strength for both our countries for decades now, and I believe it will continue to be as we work together to meet the challenges of the 21st century and also, by the way, take advantages of the opportunities of the 21st century.
I’ve been doing this a long time, Mr. Prime Minister.  I’ve never been more optimistic about our prospects.  I really mean this, never been more optimistic about our prospects than I am today.  There is no reason why we cannot in the 21st century even be more prosperous, more capable, and more forward leaning than we have been in the 20th century. 
I’m speaking about more than just the sum total of our cooperation together.  I’m going to speak to these issues and to our shared values tomorrow when I make a speech here in Sydney.  So I won’t bore you with any more today.
But let me say in closing that, again, quoting my son, Australia and the United States, we've had each other’s back for a long time.  We continue to have one another’s back.  And I assure you, the United States is going nowhere.  The United States is here in the Pacific to stay.  We are a Pacific nation.  We are a Pacific power.  And we will do our part to maintain peace and stability in the region.
Everything I’ve seen over the last few days only makes me more confident, Mr. Prime Minister, that we’ll continue to write new chapters together that will not only benefit both our nations but -- it may sound presumptuous to say, but I think benefit the region and benefit the world. 
So again, Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for your hospitality and may God protect our troops.  Thank you. 
END
4:00 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 July 19, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Australian Prime Minister Turnbull Before a Meeting
  Commonwealth Government Office
Sydney, Australia
1:55 P.M. (Local)
PRIME MINISTER TURNBULL:  Thank you, so much for making this visit.  And we know it’s a very special heartfelt visit for you.  You've come with your granddaughters.  And you've come sharing your commitment to your son Beau whose loss the world grieved with you.  You have shared throughout your career your passions, your love for America, your love for the values that America stands for and Australia stands for -- values of freedom and the rule of law.  You've spoken up for those over so many years in the Congress and as Vice President.  And now you're here in Australia sharing that passion, and Australians are reacting with warmth and enthusiasm to your visit.
You're strengthening the strongest bond -- the bonds between our two countries are as strong as any can be.  But your visit here is so welcome, so powerful because it adds that human element.  After all of the alliances, all of the history is made up of people, individuals, soldiers fighting in the First World War side by side, working together, fighting in every major conflict for a hundred years side by side, committed to the same values of freedom, the same commitment, a civic active citizenship.  The values that our countries share, we define our national identity -- not by reference to race or religion or ethnic background, but by reference to shared political values of freedom and democracy and the rule of law.
And while there are many differences between Australia and the United States in its history, that we have in common -- that commitment which we have stood for for a hundred years and will stand for for centuries to come in the future.  It is a great partnership.  We are honored by your presence.  We are warmed by your passion and your generosity and your enthusiasm.
And Julie and I and all of my colleagues here are delighted to be sitting down to talk about many matters of great moment in the world today, many challenges.  But above all, we're so pleased to see you here, Mr. Vice President.  Welcome to Australia.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you.  And congratulations.  Congratulations on your win.  Congratulations on your Cabinet.  And it’s an honor to be here.
The warmth and hospitality that's been extended to me in the few days I’ve been here has been overwhelming.  But you know you outlined what basic Australian values are, well, that's what makes this relationship so special. 
Unlike any other country in the world, we come from the same stock.  You're an immigrant nation.  And the thing I said yesterday to a group of your military is that the thing that's so similar from my perspective is the absolute sort of stamped in the DNA of every Australian and every American I know is this notion for they abhor the abuse of power.  Everyone is entitled to be treated with dignity.  And you've sort of taken the words out of my mouth.  I’ve been making a speech for years about you cannot identify an American based on race, ethnicity, origin.  You literally cannot do it.  It’s simply not possible.
  The only way you can do it is we have shared values as set out in our Constitution.  We really believe like you all men are created equal, endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights: life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.  We believe it.  We genuinely believe it.
And it’s clear, Mr. Prime Minister, you and all your predecessors and I suspect all your successors believe it.  It’s just about giving everyone an even go at it.  That's all.
And I’ll end by saying -- I’m repeating myself, I apologize to your Foreign Minister and your Ambassador.  They've heard me say it before.  But it’s a special moment for me to come to Australia because it sort of -- it ties together three generations of my family.  My grandfather Ambrose Finnegan from the coal region of Scranton, Pennsylvania, had four sons; two of whom fought in the Pacific.  One who was lost in New Guinea, who was Army Air Corps.  His aircraft went down on a reconnaissance mission.  They never found the body.  And another went home with malaria.  But they always talked the Aussies.  Not a joke.
My grandfather would actually when he talked about it sort of straighten up when he’d mention it.  And you may think I’m kidding.  As your Ambassador can tell you, no one ever doubts I mean what I say.  The problem is I sometimes say all that I mean.  (Laughter.)
But really and truly.  And then I could hear my son Beau, who was a decorated war veteran in Iraq, talk about the Aussies that he stood next to -- whether it was in Camp Liberty or out on the road, and about how the sense that, Dad, they always have your back.  That was the phrase -- always have your back.  We don't say that about everybody.  We don't say that about everybody. 
And so there is something that is unique in this relationship, and I think it has to do with a core sense of everyone is entitled to be treated with dignity.  Everybody.
My mother used to have an expression.  She’d look at me and say, Joey, never bend, never bow.  I’ve not met an Aussie who’s ever bent.  (Laughter.)  So you're making me feel at home.  It’s been a great, great opportunity.  And I had not intended on being able to take my granddaughters or granddaughter.  I have on soon-to-be-18 in September.  She tells everybody she’s -- four years ago, she’s a great kid.  And she really is interested in -- as long as she’s been alive her grandfather has been a U.S. senator or Vice President.  And so she’s really interested and very informed.  And she said to me four years ago when she was 14 years, she said, you know, Pop -- she calls me Pop -- going to Australia is on my bucket list.  (Laughter.)  Fourteen years old, bucket list.
So I said, honey, I’m going to Australia, you want to come?  She said, yes.  And then she said, is it okay if I bring -- my other granddaughter who is my deceased son, Beau’s, oldest child.  Is it okay if I bring Natalie with me?  And then my oldest granddaughter who is an honors graduate from the University of Pennsylvania in international relations and Chinese said, hey, Pop, can I go?  (Laughter.)  So you got three of my four here.  And it’s been wonderful.  They’ve been shown great hospitality, and they have absolutely loved everything they’ve seen so far.  So it’s a delight to be here.  I just have one request.  I don't think when our term is over the Ambassador is going to come home willingly.  (Laughter.)
END                  
2:02 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 17, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at a Girls Can Code Graduation Ceremony as Prepared for Delivery
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Hi, everyone! Thank you, Lidia, for that great introduction! It’s truly a pleasure to be here in Ethiopia this afternoon and to meet all of you.
I know it’s graduation day, so let me start by saying congratulations! And I’d like to take a moment to acknowledge and thank your families who have supported you along the way. Let’s give them a round of applause.
I’d also to recognize some pretty amazing women and men traveling with me across Africa this week to help highlight the importance of economic empowerment and educational opportunities for women and girls. 
I’m so pleased to be joined by Cathy Russell, Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women’s Issues; Phil Karsting, from the Department of Agriculture; Shannon Smith, from the State Department; Susan Markham, from USAID; my Chief of Staff, Sheila Nix; Eric Doucette; Special Advisor to my husband Joe, the Vice President; and two of my sisters, Bonnie Jacobs and Kim Snow.
This is my first trip to Ethiopia but I’ve heard so much about your country from my own students — many of whom are from Ethiopia. They’ve shared with me their hopes and dreams through their journals and writing assignments. I’ve been a teacher for over 30 years. I love helping students navigate their future, and see it grow bright before their eyes.
That’s exactly what’s happening to all of you. I’m so excited to see the projects that you have been working on. From what I’ve heard, you’ve worked so hard on them — coming together with your mentors and fellow students to make a difference not only in your own lives but in lives of so many in your community.
Because of the education you are getting, you are setting out on a lifelong path where most of all, you will have the confidence and tools you need to succeed. And, that’s one of the reasons why I’m traveling across Africa this week, to Ethiopia, Malawi, and Niger.
During my trip, I'll emphasize my country’s commitment to making sure girls and young women — like you — all around the world have the opportunities they deserve — to go to school, get the education they need and become whoever they aspire to be. Because when women and girls are included, they expand our economies, enrich our communities, and our countries are better off for it. It’s really that simple.
Earlier this year, I had the opportunity to help launch TeachHer — a partnership led by UNESCO and the State Department — to close the gender gap for girls in science and technology in schools and in careers. These programs will provide girls with valuable job skills and access to inspiring women leaders as mentors. Ethiopia — which will host one of the first TeachHer trainings later this year — is leading the way in the region to close the education gender gap. I’m excited to see the results of this program.
Fifteen years ago, boys were 20 percent more likely than girls to go to school. Today, this gender gap in Ethiopia has been cut in half. That’s an incredible accomplishment — and it’s because of you.
Despite the progress being made, there’s more work to be done. We know girls and boys are equally interested in STEM education and careers. But, as we’ve seen all around the world, gaps that start in secondary school widen at the college level. Currently, fewer than 20 percent of university STEM graduates in Ethiopia are female. None of our countries are there yet. We must change this. We have to convince more girls and their families that these careers are not just for boys.
That’s why I’m proud to be here with you all today. Programs like Girls Can Code are helping high school girls around the world learn computer and IT skills. It’s designed to empower and inspire young girls — not only to join STEM fields at the university level, but to encourage young women to pursue careers in STEM fields and become future leaders in technology.
I am happy to announce that because of the success of this pilot program here in Addis — because of your success — the U.S. Embassy will be expanding Girls Can Code to four new cities. This means an additional 200 female students will soon have access to the same classes and lessons that you have had so that they can reach their full potential.
Through partnerships like these with Ethiopia and other African governments, we hope to improve the lives of women and girls through educational opportunities. And we’re going to keep pushing until all children — girls and boys — have the same pathways to success and the same chance to go as far as their dreams will take them.
It’s clear to me that you understand the importance of your education. And you should be proud of the paths you are setting for yourselves. I urge you to be confident, to always believe in yourself and to never forget that education is the key to success. In the words of Grammy Award winning singer-songwriter Angelique Kidjo, “If they are educated, they will educate their communities. If they are healthy, they will ensure others grow up healthy. If they are empowered, they will change the world."
Each of you can and will change the world. But it’s up to you to seize the opportunity — to rise to the occasion. To take risks. You’re women of action. And I know there’s nothing you cannot do if you have confidence in yourself and don’t let anything stand in the way of your goals.
You are already making a difference in your own life and in the lives of your family members. Continue to challenge yourselves to make a difference in your school, your communities, and your country. You’re trailblazers. You’re leading the way for the generations of students who come after you. As you have found mentors here, be a mentor for others.
Once again, congratulations. You all are my inspiration, and I’m excited to see what you do in the future. Thank you so much for inviting me to your graduation ceremony.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 24, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden to Teachers in Argentina at Teatro Mercedes Sosa as Prepared for Delivery
Tucumán, Argentina
Hola!  Buenas tardes! 
Felicidades, Jorgelina!  And thank you for that kind introduction.  It’s so great to be here with all of you this afternoon.  I always feel right at home surrounded by teachers.
Thank you, Governor Manzur, for welcoming me to Tucuman.  It’s an honor.  I’m from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania the birthplace of America, just as Tucuman is the birthplace of Argentina—so we have a lot in common!
I’d like to thank Ambassador Mamet for bringing me to Tucuman.  We are so grateful for your service here in Argentina.  And as a lifelong educator, I want to thank you for your tireless support of educational exchanges throughout your career.
While I was in Buenos Aires, the Ambassador and I met with your Minister of Education and signed an agreement which will send 500 teachers to the United States on short-term exchanges.  What an amazing opportunity for both of our countries!  I can’t wait to hear about what you learn in the United States and what U.S. teachers learn from you.
I always say that one of my favorite things about teachers is that we are all life-long learners.  We are always curious to know more, especially when it could increase the impact we have in our classrooms, the impact we have on our students.  Just look at this room—packed with over 1,000 teachers who have worked all week, and now choose to spend their Friday siesta time, listening to another teacher speak, learning about how to expand the tools and techniques they can use in their classroom.  That’s what teachers do.  That’s what we do.  It’s inspiring to be with you.  Thank you.
Of course, we all have teachers who have made such a tremendous difference in our lives.  For me, all of my English teachers had an incredible impact in my life.  In particular, my grandmother, who was a teacher, inspired me.  She taught in a one-room schoolhouse and I would occasionally go with her to class.  In fact, I still have the school bell that she used to call her students in from recess!  I saw how she taught, how she promoted a love of reading, a love of books.  She instilled confidence in her students.  I remember her reading “Mary Poppins” to her students, and how seeing her interact in the classroom made me want to become a teacher.
I know all of you have that same passion in your classrooms.  That’s why I’ve used my platform as Second Lady of the United States to support all teachers, and to encourage incredible people like you, because you are all so vital to our kids, our communities, our countries and our future.
When my husband Joe was elected Vice President and we moved to Washington, DC on   Day in 2009, there was never a doubt that I would continue to teach.  I knew at the time that if I wanted to stay true to myself, I had to keep teaching.  Because teaching is not just what I do; it’s who I am.  It’s who we are.
Teaching isn’t just a job, it’s a calling.  It’s our calling.  And I know how hard all of you work, inside—and outside—the classroom.  Teaching doesn’t end when you leave the classroom.  You take this responsibility home every single night.  You go above and beyond; thinking up creative lessons; taking a few minutes after class to tutor the student who needs a little extra help; spending your own money on supplies. You give a word of encouragement to a students at the moment they really need it, and keep up with your students and their families outside of school.  I’ve heard that here in Argentina, many teachers even have WhatsApp groups with their students—making teaching a 24 hours-a-day, 7 days-a-week job.  Our children need and deserve more committed teachers like all of you.
I love being a teacher because I can see the difference I make in the lives of my students.  By reading their journals and offering words of support, I can do my part to help build their self-esteem.  While teaching grammar and composition skills, I try to impart a sense of confidence that will give them the strength to move in a positive direction.  Regardless of the subject I’m teaching, my goal is always to give them confidence in their own abilities because I know that confidence will carry them well beyond my classroom.  You all understand that.
Regardless of the career or discipline they choose to study next, if they believe in themselves they can become whoever they aspire to be.  And that’s one of the reasons why I’m traveling across Central and South America this week — to shine a spotlight on the importance of education, especially in science and technology for girls and women.
We know girls are just as interested as boys in science and technology education.  But, somewhere along the lines, we are losing these girls.  They’re becoming convinced that these careers are not for them.  We must change this.  We have to encourage more girls that these careers are not just for boys.  Because, when women and girls are included, they expand our economies, enrich our communities and our countries are better off for it.  It’s really that simple. 
But this isn’t just about girls—it’s about everyone.  It’s about teaching the skills that communities need in order to grow and prosper.  As teachers, you already know that.  We know that education is the great equalizer.  An education can help students become who they aspire to be—it unlocks the door of opportunity for students to achieve their dreams.  And I strongly believe, the committed teachers in the classroom are the key.
As teachers, we give a lot to our students, but they give a lot of themselves to us as well.    And I believe our profession—teaching—ours is a journey of stories.  In my classroom, I have students from all over the world—Africa, Asia, Central and South America—who have left behind their families, their friends and everything that was familiar to them to get their education in the United States.
I often say that that my students are my heroes.  Because, many of them had to overcome so many obstacles in life—tragedy and heart breaking loss—but they’re turning the page on their past and creating a brighter future for themselves and their families.  But, this is not unique to me.  My students are just like yours: determined, resilient and dedicated to building a better life for themselves, for their families, and for their community. Each of you here today could share your own stories about your own students who have been inspired by something you have taught them, and have, in turn, inspired you.  My stories are your stories.  They’re our stories.   They’re our students.
I also know from experience that while teaching is rewarding, it can also be challenging.  Even on your most trying of days, you are there for your students, for your colleagues, for your community.  You support one another.  You lift up one another.  
As I look around this room, I see an amazing community of talented educators who have many gifts to share with their students, but also with each other.  I challenge you all to stay connected, to learn from one another, to visit each other’s classrooms and schools, to share your stories.  Because, when times get tough—as they often do in teaching—we have to rely on one another.  I hope that you all have a chance to meet new colleagues and friends this afternoon and I hope you will keep up those relationships after this event.
And never forget the company that you keep, your colleagues in the teaching profession: President Obama was a teacher.  Domingo Sarmiento was a teacher.  Pope Francis was a teacher.  You are among the best that our countries—our global community—has to offer.
Thank you for everything you do in your classrooms, in your communities, for your students, and for the future of your country and our world.
Muchas gracias.  Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 22, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the Colegio de Alto Rendimiento (COAR) Cusco
Cusco, Peru
Hola!  Buenos dias!
Thank you, Diana and Alioska for that kind introduction.  I was so glad you were able to join me and Ambassador Nichols—who’s here with me today and is doing such a terrific job here in Peru—along with your teacher, at Machu Picchu yesterday.
And it’s truly a pleasure to be here this afternoon with all of you.  I’ve heard such great things about COAR Cusco.  I’ve also heard that you spend a lot of time studying, and I don’t want to keep you, so I’ll just say a few quick words.
As Second Lady of the United States, and as an English teacher, my visit to Peru has been very special.  Over the past few days, I’ve been fortunate to experience something that you all know well – the depth and the beauty of Peruvian culture.
In Lima, I tasted traditional cuisine at Surquillo Market with Peruvian Chef Flavio.  This morning, I met with the talented and inspiring women at the Chinchero weaving cooperative and learned how the Center works to preserve the textile traditions of Cusco, while providing fair trade support to the indigenous people who create them. 
I toured CoriCancha Temple and the Church of Santo Domingo—a magnificent representation of the country’s rich religious tradition and the mystifying craftsmanship of the Incas, only to be exceeded by their most significant tangible legacy: Machu Picchu.  One of the greatest artistic and architectural achievements in the world, Machu Picchu was breathtaking.  Few places in the world convey the same kind of perspective.
All along the way, I’ve been inspired by the young people I’ve met—like all of you—who are putting their education first.  Your classmates, Diana and Alioska, spoke highly of you all.  They told me that your school allows you the opportunity to meet and share ideas with students from across the country and across the many cultures that make Peru’s history so rich.  That you live among people with different points of view, different customs, and different dreams.  And with education as the common thread, you are given opportunities to learn not just from your classes, but from one another.
After visiting your classrooms, it is clear to me that you understand the importance of your education.  You should be proud of the paths you are setting for yourselves, and I urge you to be confident, to always believe in yourself and to never forget that education is the key to success.  If you continue to work hard and study, to constantly challenge yourselves, there’s no limit to how big you can dream.
I believe that, because I see it in students like Alioska and Diana—both brilliant and passionate young women who plan to continue their education in order to change their communities, and thereby change the world. Alioska credits her family—especially her brother—for motivating her to follow her dreams.  I know what that’s like and how important it is.  My sister Bonnie, who is here with me today, has been a great source of support.  They encouraged her attend your school to focus on the subjects that she loves—biology, math, chemistry, and my favorite, English. Diana also loves her school and likes to say it changed the trajectory of her life.
I trust you all have different, but equally inspiring stories and reasons for being here.  Or perhaps, it really is true, that your parents just know what’s best for you!  And that’s why I’m traveling across Central and South America this week—to shine a spotlight on the importance of education, especially for girls and women.  But this isn’t just about girls.  It’s about everyone.  It’s about making sure all students have the chance to learn and to grow, so they can give back to their communities and contribute to the success of their country.
You have a unique opportunity here at your school that allows for an advanced kind of learning.  The kind of learning that most people do not encounter until they are adults with careers. That is, that there are many different kinds of people in the world, that empathy and compromise are essential, and that all of our knowledge, as Diana has said, is required to make the world a better place for future generations.
Your education allows you to learn from your teachers, from your independent studies, and most importantly, from each other.  You have the set of keys that unlocks the door of opportunity.  But it’s up to you to seize the opportunity—to rise to the occasion.  You are already making a difference in your own life and in the lives of your family members.  Continue to challenge yourselves to make a difference in your school, your communities and your country.
I’ve been impressed by what I’ve seen in Peru.  I’ve been impressed by you.  Keep going.  Always believe in yourself. 
Thank you so much for opening your school to me.  Muchas gracias.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 19, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Universidad Tecnica Nacional as Prepared for Delivery
San Jose, Costa Rica
Hola, buenos días!
Mr. President, Madam First Lady — I’m honored to be here with you today.  Thank you for welcoming me to your country.
I’d like to wish you, Mr. President and all of the fathers here, a Happy Father’s Day.  This is a day to celebrate the important role that fathers play in their sons and daughters lives; to be there for them, provide for them, and help give them every shot at success.
Madam First Lady, it’s so lovely to see you again.  I truly appreciated your support in Paris for the UNESCO Teach Her STEAM initiative and I’m so thrilled to be here with you today.
I’m also pleased to be joined by Ambassador Haney — we are so grateful for your service here in Costa Rica.
I’d also like to thank, Valeria, for that kind introduction.  Let’s give her a round of applause.
As a teacher, one of my favorite things to do when I travel is to meet with students and young people who are furthering their education — whose future is growing brighter.  That’s exactly what’s happening to all of you.  Because of the education you are receiving here, you are being put on an upward trajectory for life.
On my trip through Central and South America over the next few days, education is one of the areas I will be focusing on.  I'll emphasize my country’s commitment to making sure girls and young women all around the world have the opportunity to go to school, get the education they need, and become whoever they aspire to be.  Because, when women and girls are included, they expand our economies, enrich our communities, and our countries are better off for it.  It’s really that simple.
I look forward to meeting with teachers and students — like all of you here today — in Peru, Argentina and Panama.  And in each of those countries, I’ll also meet with government leaders, women entrepreneurs and civil society partners.  We’ll discuss how we’re leveling the playing field to ensure that our daughters have the same opportunities in life that our sons are given.  Because the success of a nation is measured by the success of its women — by your success; your equal opportunity.  And, this is a region of expanding opportunity and shared prosperity. 
Of the Western Hemisphere, President Obama has said, and I quote, “We’re not just nations, but we’re also neighbors.  Millions of people in the United States are bound to the Americas through ties of commerce and family.”  So, from day one of our administration, President Obama and my husband Joe, the Vice President, have made improving relationships in the Western Hemisphere — based upon mutual respect and equal partnerships — a foreign policy priority.  It was time to turn the page on the past and begin a new chapter.
Conflicts remain.  Crisis and important issues still need to be addressed.  But together, our region is moving toward a more prosperous future.  We all have a stake in the success of our nations; a stake in the success of our corner of the world.
As a lifelong educator, I believe that education is one of the keys to securing that success.  You —the students here today — are our hope for the future.  And it’s our responsibility to make sure all girls and boys — equally — have opportunity to learn and to grow.
Yet, too many girls don’t have that opportunity — they’re denied their full potential.  Over 62 million girls around the world are not even in school — half of them are adolescents.  They’re deprived of the opportunity to learn just because they’re girls.  It’s not that girls don’t want to go to school.  They know an education is the foundation to build a better life for themselves and their families.
That’s why the Obama-Biden administration launched Let Girls Learn — an initiative to help girls all around the world attain a quality education that empowers them, lifts up their families, and transforms their communities.  As part of Let Girls Learn, the Peace Corps here in Costa Rica will also sponsor a camp for students to learn more about science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) later this year; to connect with mentors, and to gain confidence and skills that will help them succeed in these fields.
Costa Rica is a leader in Latin America in ensuring that women and girls have access to a quality education and equal opportunities.  Organizations like Women in Science and Technology — also known as MenTe — are encouraging girls to study and work in STEM fields, giving them a chance to experiment with robots and create their own apps.
I just met one young female MenTe participant named Maye.  Maye suffered from depression and dropped out of school.  But she continued to attend the MenTe camp every Saturday to work on her own app that helps students also struggling with depression.  Not only was Maye’s app selected for development, but she returned to school in January and is now considering a career in engineering.
I’ve been inspired by so many girls just like Maye who I’ve met throughout my travels around the world — in Africa, Asia and the Middle East — who  have overcome significant obstacles in life to go to school, to get an education.  
Together, by removing some of these obstacles, we are investing not only in them but in our shared future.  So, we’re going to keep pushing until all children —girls and boys — have pathways to success and the chance to go as far as their dreams will take them. 
As I mentioned earlier, just last week, I joined First Lady Peñas at UNESCO in Paris to launch the Teach Her STEAM initiative — a global public private partnership to help close the gender gap for girls interested in STEM and art/design education and careers.
This program will train teachers to develop STEM and arts and design courses, create afterschool programs, and inspire all students to realize their full potential.  It will also provide girls with employable skills and give them access to successful women leaders as mentors. 
Your country, which is setting the standard in Latin America in supporting girls interested in STEAM, will host the first Teach Her training in our region later this year.  So, thank you to the First Lady for your commitment to this cause.  It means to so much to so many in your country and in our region.  And thank you, President Solis, for taking such an active role fighting for women and girls here in Costa Rica and at the United Nations.  It’s going to take all of us — educators and community leaders, women and men, boys and girls — to make progress for gender equality.
Our administration also started an initiative five years ago called 100,000 Strong in the Americas.  The idea is simple: by the end of this decade we want 100,000 students from the Americas to study in the United States; and we want 100,000 students from the U.S. to study abroad in the Americas.  It’s an exchange of ideas and cultures that will enrich the lives of people on both sides.  It will bring our countries closer together.
An amazing example from this program is a student named Lourdes, who grew up in Argentina, where there is a high indigenous population.  Today, she studies geology at the National University of Tucuman.  As part of the 100,000 Strong program, Lourdes was able to explore hundreds of miles of the Navajo Nation in Arizona.  Now, she’s comparing the sustainable energy practices of indigenous communities in northern Argentina and northern Arizona.  The United States and Argentina will certainly benefit from Lourdes’ work.  That’s the kind of connection and innovation that this program is bringing to our students, our countries, our region.
We’re also working together to cultivate the next generation of women leaders and business owners.  In 2012, our administration launched the Women’s Entrepreneurship in the Americas Initiative.  We’re bringing together governments, companies, civil society partners, and individual entrepreneurs to break down barriers women face when starting their businesses to give them the tools they need to grow their businesses.
In Peru, for example, this initiative has connected entrepreneurs to supply chains.  One entrepreneur who sold jewelry now has a relationship with a major retailer.  Today, she’s partnering with other women entrepreneurs to expand her business and sell other products.  I saw a similar project last year when I traveled to Guatemala — those women, their determination, truly moved me.
It’s clear that when women are given the opportunity, not only do they succeed, but they also mentor and empower other women to do the same.  It’s only when women have the freedom to fully participate in the economy that we will truly achieve prosperity.  And these partnerships are making a real difference for thousands of women and girls in your community, in your country, and in the lives of hundreds of thousands of more women and girls throughout the Western Hemisphere.
On my trip, we’ll also discuss a challenge that no woman should have to face, a challenge that exists in Central and South America as well as the United States.  Gender-based violence is a problem that no country has solved.  But the fact is that these forms of violence — whether it’s violence at home or in the community — holds back families, countries, and economies.
That’s why, years ago, my husband Joe, the Vice President, wrote the international Violence Against Act — which would cut off foreign aid and assistance to those countries that engage in practices that are simply inhumane.  As Joe has said, “Violence against women is a stain on the moral character of a society.  And it is a stain on the conscience of a country.”  [END QUOTE]
It is an issue of basic human rights.  And we are committed to tackling this challenge so that everyone — women and men — is safe and able to fully participate in society.  Not only is it good for our country when our neighbors are secure and successful — it’s in our shared interest — but because you deserve nothing less.
My husband often says that we want to work with Latin America to build a hemisphere that is democratic, middle class, and secure.  A hemisphere where the rights of citizens are fully respected and elections meet the highest test of transparency and accountability, including welcoming international observers.  A hemisphere where men and women can harness the power of entrepreneurship and education to provide for themselves and their families.  A hemisphere where the streets are safe, communities are free from fear, and businesses can operate without the threats of crime and violence.  And empowering women and girls is vital to the economic, political and cultural success of every country.
The opportunities in our hemisphere — for all of you here today — are real.  And I want you to know that the United States is committed to continuing our work together to achieve them.
Thank you so much for welcoming me here today.  You all are my inspiration and I’m excited to see what you do in the future.
Muchas gracias.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 14, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as Prepared for Delivery
Paris, France
Bonne après midi!  Good afternoon.
I would like to begin by asking you to join me in continuing to offer thoughts and prayers for the victims and families of the shooting in Florida.  I’d like to thank the President, the Prime Minister, the people of France, and all those around the world for your love and support.  To see the Eiffel Tower lit up last night in rainbow colors with the American flag flying beneath was heartwarming.  We are one people.
This morning, we awoke to news of another tragic incident here in France.  I’d like to offer my condolences to all those affected.
Thank you, Ambassador Nix-Hines, for that kind introduction, and for inviting me back to UNESCO to be part of an event highlighting two issues that are so close to my heart: the importance of girls’ education around the world; and the difference teachers can make in the lives of their students.  Your passionate support of STEAM initiatives, a comprehensive approach to STEM education including related arts and design programs is so important.  As Steve Jobs once famously put it, and I quote, “technology alone is not enough.  It’s technology married with the liberal arts, married with the humanities, that yields us the results that make our hearts sing.” 
I would also like to thank you, Madam UNESCO Director General; the First Lady of Costa Rica; all of the assembled permanent representatives; distinguished guests, TeachHer partners, and UNESCO senior staff for joining us today.
This is personal for me.  I have a daughter and four granddaughters — one of whom, Natalie, is here with me today.  I hope she’s inspired by what she sees — by what you all have committed to doing at UNESCO and in your communities back home, to help close the gender gap in STEAM education and careers.  Because all children — regardless of gender — deserve the opportunity to follow their dreams and be successful in rewarding careers.
I’d also like to acknowledge a group of students I just met who are here today showing off their STEAM projects.  Let’s give these smart young women and their teachers a round of applause.
As Second Lady of the United States, I’ve had the incredible opportunity to travel all around the world.  One of my favorite things to do when I travel is meet with students and their teachers.
Two years ago, I had the opportunity to visit a girls’ school in Zambia.  Before joining one of the classes — where students were learning their vowels — a colorful board hanging in the hallway with the words “Our Dreams” caught my attention.
Students at the school posted what they hoped to become when they grow up. 
These students dreamed big.  They aspired to be doctors, pilots, and lawyers.  My favorite was the student who dreamed to become a teacher.  Every dream posted on the board had a common purpose; every girl showed a desire to help her community and country.
And, I believe it’s our responsibility to make sure all girls are given the same opportunity to learn and grow into confident and independent women, so they can realize their dreams and help contribute to the success of their nations.
All around the world today, too many girls’ dreams are deferred.  Too often girls are discouraged from pursuing their ambitions — they’re told they can’t dream big because of who they are; because they’re girls. Even more alarming, over 62 million girls worldwide are not even in school — and half of them are adolescents.  Those girls are not learning the basic skills they need to get ahead and provide a better life for their families. 
This is unacceptable.  That’s why the Obama Biden administration launched Let Girls Learn — an initiative to break down barriers that keep girls out of school, and to open the doors of education for girls around the world. 
And, I’m proud to be part of an administration that since day one has prioritized making quality education, especially STEM education, accessible for all kids.  We’ve made strides to strengthen the pre-school through 12 STEM teacher corps; dispel gender stereotypes; and celebrate the achievements of students pursuing these fields. But, despite the progress we’re making, there’s more work to be done.
Today, there’s a high global demand for skilled science, technology, engineering and art/design experts.  Yet, women continue to remain severely under-represented in that workforce in every region of the world.  Women in the United States represent 57 percent of the workforce but only hold one-quarter of the jobs at the top tech companies.  And these numbers are even lower for women when you look at careers in engineering and computer sciences.  We need to hire more women in STEAM fields if we’re going to get ahead.
In the U.S. alone, there will be more than 1.4 million computing-related job openings by 2020 — that’s just four years from now.  But at the rate we’re going, we can only fill about 30 percent of those jobs with U.S. graduates.  We have to do better.
Students of both genders are equally interested in STEAM education and careers.  But a gap begins to open up and by the time college rolls around, young men are almost twice as likely as young women to graduate with a degree in those fields.  Somewhere along the lines, we are losing these girls.  They’re becoming convinced that these careers are not for them.   We believe we can, and we must change this.  We have to encourage more girls that these careers are not just for boys. 
There’s an obvious economic argument to be made as well: women are economic catalysts, especially in the most critical and marginalized areas around the world.  Advancing women’s equality in the economy could add $12 trillion to the global GDP by 2025. 
So, investing in girls’ education is good for the bottom line.  But, more importantly, women have a right to equality of opportunity.  We have to do what we can to level the playing field — to make sure that our daughters have the same options that our sons are given.  Because our nations cannot reach their full potential until its women and girls reach theirs.
That’s why we’re here today.  Because it will take all of us — policymakers and business leaders, educators and community leaders, women and men, boys and girls — to make progress for gender equality.  We’re here to launch TeachHer — a global public private partnership led by UNESCO and the State Department — to close the gender gap for girls in STEAM education and careers.
The new TeachHer initiative is designed to work with your governments and your educators to ensure teachers have the training they need to support all students — girls and boys — to encourage and inspire them to realize their full potential.  Through this new initiative, UNESCO will provide best practices on how to develop STEAM courses and afterschool programs.  These programs will provide girls with employable skills and access to inspiring women leaders as mentors.  I want to thank the Governments of Costa Rica and Ethiopia for hosting the first TeachHer trainings later this year. 
UNESCO will be working with the Ministries of Education in countries from both regions to train teachers from the surrounding countries.  After the training, these teachers and administrators will return home to pass on that knowledge not just to students, but to their colleagues as well.  As an educator, I know the benefit of collaborating with my colleagues on curriculum.  They will implement these programs in local schools and develop afterschool programs to sustain girls’ interest in STEAM fields. 
I’m excited to return to Costa Rica next week and to Ethiopia in July.  I’ll visit students, teachers and government officials to see firsthand the progress they’re making in the region to advance girls education.  And I look forward to continuing my conversation with you, Madam First Lady, while I’m in Costa Rica.
In 2013, Rita Pierson, an American educator from Texas, delivered a TED Talk on what makes teachers so special.  She said, and I quote, “every child deserves a champion — an adult who will never give up on them, who understands the power of connection and insists that they become the best that they can possibly be.”
That’s why we’re here, and that’s why I love being teacher.  I love seeing the difference I hope to make in the lives of my students.  I make an effort for my students — many of whom are from all over the world — to let them know that I care about them.  I try to impart a sense of confidence in my students — to help build their self-esteem — that will give them the strength they need to move in a positive direction.  Because an education can help students become who they aspire to be — it unlocks the door of opportunity for students to achieve their dreams.  And I strongly believe, the committed teachers in the classroom are the key.   Teachers know education is the great equalizer.
If we invest in our teachers today; if we invest in women and girls today; if we give girls the opportunity to go to school and graduate; recognize their value and welcome their contributions; and make sure women have a seat at the table today, then tomorrow, no little girl will grow up in a world where her dreams are denied; her potential unrealized.  It’s not just words that are going to make a difference.  We need your commitment.  We need you to act.  We must act.
Merci beaucoup!  Thank you very much.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 06, 2016
FACT SHEET: Vice President Biden Launches Open Access Data Resource as Part of Cancer Moonshot
“This is good news in the fight against cancer. With the launch of this new national resource, anyone can freely access raw genomic and clinical data for 12,000 patients - with more records to follow. Increasing the pool of researchers who can access data and decreasing the time it takes for them to review and find new patterns in that data is critical to speeding up development of lifesaving treatments for patients."
-Vice President Joe Biden
Making a decade’s worth of progress in five years in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer – the goal of the Cancer Moonshot launched by the President in his 2016 State of the Union Address and led by Vice President Joe Biden – will take all resources possible, and data is a particularly valuable one. 
Today, in support of making research data freely accessible, the Vice President will visit the University of Chicago to mark the public release of the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Genomic Data Commons (GDC), a first-of-its-kind public data platform for storing, analyzing, and sharing genomic and associated clinical data on cancer. The GDC creates a foundational system for broad sharing and analysis of tumor genome sequences (the DNA unique to cancer cells), which is critical for advancing the field of precision medicine and improving the care of cancer patients, and is designed with appropriate privacy and security protections
This launch marks progress on both the Cancer Moonshot and the President’s Precision Medicine Initiative, which are aimed at enabling individualized care through effective prevention, diagnosis, and therapies.  By providing open access to large volumes of data to advance progress in cancer (with appropriate patient consent), the GDC continues the Administration’s legacy on opening up data, particularly to support health.   
The next breakthrough in cancer treatment will be advanced by rapid access to the datasets that can help researchers understand more about how cancer progresses and which treatments have the best chance of working for individual patients. In recent years, vast amounts of genomic data have been generated through the use of “next-generation” DNA and RNA sequencing technologies, and researchers are eager to unlock new patterns of discovery that lie within this treasure trove of information. The GDC is a critical step in crowdsourcing rich data to researchers from across the community. Some key features of the GDC are:
Interactive: The GDC is an interactive and centralized system for researchers to store, analyze, and share genomic and clinical cancer data.  The GDC has important safeguards built-in to protect patient privacy and enable secure data downloading.
Easily searchable: Researchers will be able to search for the data they need. When fully implemented, information on treatment response can advance our understanding of specific subtypes of cancer that are susceptible to current treatments and those that are resistant.
Testbed for new approaches: The NCI GDC is unique in that it provides raw, unprocessed genomic data, allowing researchers to reanalyze the information as new computational tools and analytical methods are developed.
Computational capabilities:  Web-based tools supporting fine-grained queries, advanced visualization, smart search technologies, and personalized download facilities to enable a wide-range of users of varying computational expertise.
Rich dataset: At its launch, the GDC will standardize genomic and clinical data from large-scale NCI programs, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and its pediatric equivalent, Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Therapies (TARGET). These data, initially represent more than ten thousand cancer patients and their tumors and the GDC will accommodate cancer genomic sets that cancer researchers from around the world wish to share.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 24, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center’s 2016 One Hundred Gala as Prepared for Delivery
Boston, Massachusetts
Good evening!
Thank you, Jack, for welcoming all of us here this evening.  You’ve been a good friend to the people of this city for so many years. Your compassion and your continued actions have made all the difference in the world to so many in Boston and all across our country.  Truly, thank you.
I’d also like to thank my dear friend, Tim Quinn.  Tim, a cancer survivor himself, has been involved with the one hundred as a committee member for many years.  Tim has told me countless times that his work with Mass General is so important to him.  And, Tim’s partner Isaac is with us tonight as well.  Honestly, you can’t find two people that are more fun to spend time with than Tim and Isaac.  Thank you, Tim, for thinking of me and for always being there for me — it’s truly an honor to be here with you this evening.
Finally, I’d like to recognize all the fighters and survivors of cancer who are here today.  I am so humbled to be with all of you.  I am inspired by your bravery.  Each of you has a powerful story to tell about your own personal battle — one that will raise awareness and help educate so many others.  Thank you.
In October, when Joe announced that he would not seek the nomination for the Presidency, we had already decided to focus on another campaign.  This campaign.  This fight against this disease.  Joe called it our moonshot.  He knew it would take all of us — a nation-wide commitment bringing together our best and brightest — to make our dream of ending cancer as we know it, a reality.  Joe never picks the easy jobs.
As announced just a few hours ago, on Wednesday, June 29th we’re hosting a Cancer Moonshot Summit in Washington, DC.  The Summit will bring together leaders like you — doctors, researchers, advocates, patients and survivors — men and women from every sector who have a role to play in making progress on the Cancer Moonshot goal, which is to double the rate of progress toward a cure.
We can do this by accelerating investment in some of the most promising and cutting-edge technologies and cancer treatments.  By increasing engagement in prevention efforts and working to expand access to care.  By improving the way data is shared across the board.  And Boston is leading the way.  Earlier today, I had the opportunity to visit PatientsLikeMe, an online network which is empowering patients, improving their outcomes, and contributing data for research.
For Joe and me, this fight is personal.  My sister recently had a stem cell transplant.  Our son Beau.  My mother.  My father.  So, we know how important this fight is.  But we also know it’s bigger than us.  It affects millions of people around the world every day. 
Since President Obama announced Joe would be at the helm of mission control of the Cancer Moonshot initiative, we’ve been traveling across the country and around the world — hearing directly from top researchers, doctors, patient advocates and cancer fighters and survivors.
That brings me to one of tonight’s honorees: Terri Fuller.  Terri was the 10th woman on her mother’s side to be diagnosed with breast cancer.  Her own mother died of breast cancer at the age of 31 — the exact same age Terri received her diagnosis.
Like all of tonight’s honorees: Terri is a fighter.  She’s a survivor.  And a tireless advocate.  Terri dedicates her time to educating and uplifting young women with breast cancer, and provides one-on-one support for breast cancer patients.  She also happens to be an English professor at a community college in Illinois.  You’re a woman after my own heart!  Your dedication is both courageous and inspiring.
All of you here tonight know this fight isn’t easy.  You know the importance of the caregivers who walk alongside their patients.  Their support is so critical.
So, thank you to Mass General, especially Dr. Daniel Haber, the director of the Mass General Cancer Center for your tremendous work and commitment.  Mass General’s customized, innovative treatments and compassionate, patient-centered care are fundamentally saving the lives of so many people — adults and children — battling this disease. 
Closing the gap between scientific discovery and clinical medicine is critical to our Moonshot mission of accelerating cancer treatment toward a cure.  And, as you all know, Mass General really is the gold standard in promoting patients’ quality of life through an array of patient and caregiver support and educational programs.
That’s what tonight is all about — it’s about all of you — it’s about the everyday amazing hero — who knows we all have a role to play and we can all make a difference.  Because only together can we seize this moment to truly change the face of cancer as we know it.
So to all of you — the scientists in the labs making discoveries that will lead us to better outcomes; the caregivers along the way who make the day-to-day battle with cancer even a little easier; and the survivors who are on the front lines who have dedicated your time, your heart, yourselves to this cause, thank you.
Keep going, and God bless.
###
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 16, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Northern Virginia Community College Commencement Ceremony as Prepared for Delivery
Jiffy Lube Live
Bristow, Virginia
Hello, NOVA!
This is a special night for me.  This will be my final commencement address as Second Lady, and what an honor to do it at the college that means the most to me.  Thank you to President Ralls and the Board of Trustees.
Congratulations, graduates, you did it!  On behalf of President Obama, the First Lady and the Vice President, my husband Joe — we are all so proud of you.  Graduating from college is an extraordinary achievement.  Cherish this moment.  Yes, it’s an individual accomplishment.  But, it’s also a team effort.  So, let’s thank your teachers, your friends and your families.
You never know where life will take you.  I grew up in Philly.  After I married Joe, I lived in Delaware for most of my life.  I raised our children and taught full-time at another community college.  Then, in 2008, Joe was asked to be President Obama’s running mate.  And when we won, everything changed.
I started receiving emails from someone at NOVA.  He would write, “Jill, you have to keep teaching. Please consider us. We know you would love it here!”  Well, Dean Jimmy McClellan, thank you for all those emails.  Thank you for your encouragement, and for all of your support during the last 8 years.  Truly, I wouldn’t be here tonight without you.
When I took Jimmy up on his offer to visit the Alexandria campus, I immediately fell in love.  It felt like home.  Joe and I had just moved into the Vice President’s Residence at the Naval Observatory in DC. And I was given a new office in the White House.  It has marble floors and columns, a fireplace, and large windows that over-look the National Mall.
Then of course, I have my cubicle at NOVA.  But, like all the other teachers, my cubicle is filled with family photos, crayon drawings from my grandchildren, notes from my students.  It’s a place that feels most like me.
It’s been an honor to serve our country but I knew at the time that if I wanted to stay true to myself, I had to keep teaching.  Because teaching is not just what I do; it’s who I am. 
All of the teachers here today understand that.  We take this responsibility home with us every single night.  Teaching doesn’t end when you walk out of the classroom.  We’re invested in you — our students and your future.  We cajole.  We counsel.  We mentor.  We do whatever it takes to make that connection with our students; to give them the confidence they need to succeed in school and beyond.
As a lifelong educator, I couldn’t leave that behind.  I couldn’t just move to Washington and only live Joe’s life.  So, ever since then, I’ve pretty much been living a double life.
One moment, I’m taping a live interview at 7:15 AM in the Blue Room at the White House for the TODAY Show talking about President Obama’s State of the Union address and his continued support of community colleges.  And then the next moment, at 8:00 AM, I’m in class at NOVA teaching English Comp 111.
Many of my students don’t know I have two jobs.  For example, at the end of one semester, about a year ago, a student of mine came running into my classroom and said, “Dr. B I saw you on the television last night with First Lady Michelle Obama.”  My student said to her mother, “Mom! Mom!  That’s my English teacher!”  And her mother said, “That’s not your teacher, that’s the Second Lady.”  They may not know that I’m married to the Vice President, but my students know that my first priority is to them.
And I’ve loved being part of this Administration.  I’ve tried to use my position to make a difference for military families, for women and girls around the world, and for teachers and community colleges and their students.
As a community college educator, I feel like I was in the right place at the right.  The Obama-Biden administration has lifted up community colleges, recognizes their value and the importance of investing in them.  It’s been the opportunity of a lifetime.  It’s been an incredible journey.
But when I’m at NOVA, I’m home.  I’m one of you.  A member of the faculty.  Your English teacher.  I’m part of the NOVA community.  And I’ve learned as much from my students — from all of you — as I have from traveling around the world.  So, you’re probably thinking, as Second Lady she’s met famous people like the Queen, stayed in exotic palaces and dined with world leaders. 
But every step of the way, I’ve been inspired by the strength and courage of ordinary people across our country doing extraordinary things — just like you, the students at NOVA.  What you are doing is emblematic of America’s very best traditions — hard work, self-improvement, asking for only one thing: opportunity.
Just as America has progressed over the years, so too has NOVA.  This is NOVA’s 50th anniversary.  The first class to graduate from NOVA had 82 students.  Ten were women.  And they received degrees in eight different fields.  Tonight, over 7,600 students will receive their college diploma.  Fifty five percent are women.  You have earned degrees in 60 fields of study.  And half of you will transfer to a four-year college within a year.
When I started teaching 30 years ago, community college students were typically seen as “non-traditional.”  But today, with more than half of our nation’s college students attending community colleges, with so many of you working full time, supporting families, and still attending school, non-traditional has become the new traditional.
You are single parents who come to school in the evening, weary from a long day, yet eager to create a brighter future for your children.  You are workers, who have gone as far as you can in your jobs, coming back to school to get the skills you need to reach the next level.  And, several of tonight’s graduates are veterans.
As a military mom, I am always inspired by the strength, resilience and pride of our veterans.  I know you have the skills, discipline and leadership to succeed in anything you put your mind to.  You are among the best our nation has to offer.  Thank you, to all of the veteran graduates here tonight, for your service to our country.
Now, most commencement speakers give graduates advice on what to expect when they graduate and enter the real world.  But most of you already live in the real world.  The average age of a community college student is 28 years old.  And one of my students was 83.  Regardless of circumstances, you show up.  You work hard.  And, I am profoundly moved by your determination to learn, and by your quest to make a better life for yourselves.
So, as I was thinking about what to say to all of you tonight, rather than give you advice on how to succeed in life, I gave myself an assignment.  Every semester in my class, I assign an essay to my students using the title, “This I Believe.”  I first heard about it on National Public Radio.  I ask them to tell me their core beliefs.  Something they would be willing to stand up for; to speak for; to fight for.
Tonight, I’d like to share with you my own essay about what I believe.
This I believe: I have long said that community colleges are America’s best kept secret, but I believe it’s time for that to change.  I believe we need to celebrate community colleges — and their students — for who they really are: innovative, inspiring and essential.  Not just celebrate, but support.
But this, too, I believe: Too many hardworking Americans still have to worry about whether college is affordable.  For millions of people across the country, community college is the single best path to opportunity — to achieving their dreams — whether that means earning a four-year degree or finding a rewarding career.
This I believe: The more than 1,100 community colleges nationwide are not just the key to a brighter future for their students, they are the backbone of America’s postsecondary education and training system — and one of the keys to a more prosperous economic future.  That’s why I also believe — as does President Obama — that community college should be free for all responsible students.
This I believe: With the education that you have received here at NOVA, there is literally no limit to how high you can go.  Community college graduates have gone on to become successful CEO’s, journalists, Hollywood directors, even astronauts.
Finally, this I believe: a community college education can truly change people’s lives.  And community college graduates — including every single one of you — can change the world.
I believe in you.  Always believe in yourselves.
Congratulations, graduates!
###
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 May 05, 2016
Remarks by the President, Vice President, First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces 5th Anniversary Event
Joint Base Andrews
6:18 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, everyone!  (Applause.)  Great to see you!  Can't be anyplace I'd rather be.  I was going to say something nice about Jon, but the hell with him.  (Laughter.) 
Jon, thank you for continuing to shine a spotlight on our incredible warriors, and also for all you did for the 9/11 first responders.  Jon, had you not literally thrown your body in front of the train, they would have never gotten the coverage they got. And I want to thank you, man.  Because what Jon does -- what Jon does comes from his heart.  He means it.  So, thank you very much, Jon.  (Applause.) 
I want to thank all the artists you're about to hear tonight.  We just got to meet backstage.  I want to thank everyone in uniform here today and all of you overseas for what you do for this country day in and day out.  And, J.D., thank you.  You're always, always looking out for our military families, including mine. 
Every military family in here can tell you -- those who are here and those who are listening -- that every family knows it's the little things -- it's the little things that really matter.
USO volunteers are there to say good-bye to our warriors as they deploy.  And they’re the first ones to welcome them home when they return.  It matters.  I know it mattered to our son, Beau.  He, after a year in Iraq, set foot on American soil at the Pease Air National Guard Base in New Hampshire, there was a long line of warriors standing there to salute his brigade as they got off, to say thank you, thank you, thank you.  They represented everything from World War II to the Korean War, to Iraqi Freedom.
And you know, he said -- and it always surprised me when people would ask me about it -- he said it was the most meaningful thing that happened to us, he said, getting off that plane and seeing everybody just standing there.  It was the middle of the night.  Just saying, welcome home. 
You all know it.  You know what it feels like. 
And on a personal note, we also remember how the USO embraced us when we lost Beau.
Joining Forces, five years -- Michelle and Jill making things better all across the country and around the world.  You all know not only they worked so hard for your families, because they believed.  But you’ve inspired them.  You’ve inspired Jill. Whether it's at Brooke Army Medical Center or Walter Reed, or Ramstein Airbase in Germany, or Camp Lejeune, Fort Leonard Wood, Aviano Airbase in Italy, United Arab Republic, Kadena Airbase in Japan, or standing next to me at Al Faw Palace -- where some of you were -- at Camp Victory, congratulating your Mexican immigrant who was being sworn in, in uniform, as a United States citizen.
Ladies and gentlemen, the President and I -- you might expect us to say this -- are incredibly proud of what Michelle and Jill have done.  Always, always fighting for your families.  Because you are -- you are virtually the bone and sinew of this country.  You're America’s backbone. 
And all those family members who watched their son or daughter or husband, wife deploy, every single day, every minute that went by, you thought of them -- once a day, twice a day, 10 times a day.  There’s a famous English poet who wrote, “They also serve who only stand and wait.”  So to every family member -- I mean this from the bottom of my heart -- for every family member of anyone in uniform, we owe you. 
My mom used to have an expression -- she’d say, remember, Joe, you're defined by your courage and you're redeemed by your loyalty.  I heard it once, I heard it a hundred times growing up. To all of you in this room, in this hangar, all of you here, you live up to my mother’s code every single, solitary day.  And we owe you.
As Jill always points out, 1 percent of you are the ones defending the entire population, but 99 percent remaining of the population owes you our thanks, our appreciation, and our gratitude. 
You here and all those listening and so many more are all part of the greatest generation of warriors -- and this is not hyperbole -- the greatest generation of warriors the world has ever seen.  More than 4.6 million of you signed up since 9/11, knowing with almost virtual certainty you’d be deployed into harm’s way; 2.7 million of you have been deployed into harm’s way.  An unbroken chain of patriots, you’ve stood guard over this country in a way that is just -- you have to see you in the field to really understand it. 
The President and I -- I've seen you in Bosnia, Basra, Fallujah, Ramadi, Kabul, Kandahar, the Upper Kunar Valley.  A great opportunity was being back last week in Baghdad and Erbil. You are literally the finest warriors in the history of the world.  You're incredible.
But I'm not the only one who understands this.  The man I'm honored to stand with for the last eight years, in quiet moments, in difficult moments, in debates within the Oval Office and in the White House -- we were down in the Situation Room.  We had been given bad news and sometimes good news.  Every decision he makes -- I can say this without fear of contradiction -- every decision he makes he makes with you and your families in mind.  You're the beginning of every important decision that this man makes.
So, ladies and gentlemen, welcome our Commander-in-Chief, Barack Obama.  The President of the United States of America.  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Hello, everybody!  (Applause.)  Give it up for Joe Biden!  (Applause.)  Oh, it is good to see all of you here today.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.  Everybody, please have a seat.
I want to recognize all of our outstanding military leaders who are here.  And I want to acknowledge our Secretary of the Air Force, Deborah Lee James.  (Applause.)  Chief Master Sergeant Mitchell Brush from the National Guard.  (Applause.)  Major General Darryl Burke.  (Applause.)  Wing Commander Bradley Hoagland.  (Applause.)  And I want to thank the USO for the outstanding work that they have done for so many years and that means so much to not only those who serve in uniform but also their families.  So please give it up for the USO.  (Applause.)  WE are very proud of them. 
And let’s hear it for the funny people who are here tonight who are going to be -- I think -- telling a few jokes, I hope,  including our host, the Bob Hope of this USO Show -- Jon Stewart. The one and only.  (Applause.)  I do want to mention, though, any jokes told about me, you should not laugh.  (Laughter.)  I'm just kidding.  This is actually my second comedy show in the past week.  (Laughter and applause.)  The good news is there are no tuxedos.  (Laughter.)  And most importantly, I get to spend some time with you, the men and women who make up the greatest fighting force the world has ever seen.  (Applause.)   
I know we already did the rollcall, but I just want to see if you guys can do it a little bit better this time.  (Laughter.) And by the way, I'm going to start with Army, because Jon made fun of you.  Army!  (Applause.)  There you go.  We got Navy here. (Applause.)  Air Force is in the house!  (Applause.)  This is an Air Force base.  (Laughter.)  I'm just saying.  You got a little home field advantage.  (Laughter.) 
Marines!  (Applause.)  And Coast Guard.  (Applause.)  Good job, Coast Guard.  (Laughter.)  Military spouses and kids, let’s hear you!  (Applause.)
    This is a nice way for me to not just say thank you for your service, but to give a particular thanks to Joint Base Andrews, home of the 89th Airlift Wing.  Because Joe and I spend a little bit of time on this base.  (Laughter.)  You guys are the ones who take care of our planes.  You keep us on time -- most of the time.  (Laughter.)  And you're always the first ones to welcome us home.   So you mean so much to us.  And I'm so glad we're able to do something here so that you guys know we don't take you for granted.  And Michelle and I, Joe and Jill, when we come in and out of this base, we know how many people stand behind the planes and the helicopters and all the incredible work that's being done just moving us around every single day.  So thank you very much.  We really mean it.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
Thanks for your service here.  Thanks for your service around the world.  Now, because I'm standing between you and a party, I am going to be the Commander-in-Brief.  (Laughter.)   
One of my greatest honors is to serve you and your families. And that means using our military power wisely.  It means sending you into harm’s way when it’s absolutely necessary.  It means making sure that you -- our troops, our veterans, your families
-- are getting the care and the benefits that you’ve earned.  It means cutting the disability claims backlog.  It means helping you and your families, whether it's starting a business or pursuing your education under the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
And the good news is we've made a lot of progress over these past eight years.  But the work of doing right by you and your families is never done.  And it is not just a job for government.  And that’s why we’re here today. 
Back on the campaign in 2008, Michelle sat down with some military spouses, and she was deeply moved by the stories of your service, and your strength, and your resilience.  She heard stories of families enduring multiple deployments.  This was obviously at a time when we still had 180,000 troops deployed between Iraq and Afghanistan.  Spouses and veterans were coming home and struggling to find jobs.  Children constantly moving from school to school.  And these are stories you live out every day, but they’re ones that the rest of the country wasn’t always hearing.  So Michelle pledged that if she became First Lady, she’d help share those stories far and wide -- and challenge Americans to stand with you.
And five years ago, she teamed up with another formidable force, Jill Biden, to start Joining Forces.  As a Blue Star Mom, as a teacher whose dad served in World War II, Jill was already fired up about reaching out to military kids.  And together, they wanted to channel what they knew was America’s goodwill towards our military into something concrete and something real.  Not just a parade on Veterans Day or Memorial Day; not just honors at a ballgame, but what was happening day-to-day to make people’s lives better.  And so Michelle and Jill wanted to help folks answer a question that a lot of people were asking, which is, how can we do more?  How can we help more?
So they started by focusing on the most basic ingredient of stability and security -- a job.  In the aftermath of the economic crisis, the unemployment rate overall had reached 10 percent.  But for some of our veterans it was even worse.  As many as one in four of our youngest vets were looking for jobs.  And too many of our military spouses were struggling to find work because their families were constantly relocated. 
So Michelle and Jill reached out to hundreds of America’s biggest brands and employers -- companies like Walmart and Disney and Amazon -- telling them the same thing I tell CEOs every time, which is, if you want a job done right, hire a vet, hire a military spouse.  (Applause.)  They know how to handle stress.  They know how to do the job.  They know how to perform under pressure.  They’ve proven themselves.  (Applause.) 
And the good news is, over the past five years, America’s businesses have begun to answer the call.  All told, the unemployment rate for veterans has been cut in half, and through Joining Forces, companies have hired or trained more than 1.2 million veterans and military spouses. 
But Michelle and Jill didn’t stop there.  They worked with states to change professional licensing laws so that our vets can get credit for your military training and spouses can get hired when you move across state lines.  They’re working to rally almost 900 mayors and local leaders to get our homeless veterans into housing and to get the support that they need.  They help teachers and schools support military students from kindergarten through college.  They supported our caregivers and our wounded warriors.  And they’ve worked to destigmatize mental health challenges. 
They’ve worked with Hollywood to share your stories with the American people in movies and television.  And they’ve shined a special light on our women servicemembers and our veterans.  And they’ve mobilized communities all across the country to honor and support our military families. 
All of this just in five years.  And here’s the thing.  This event is not the endpoint, it's not the finish line.  This is just a marker on the race.  It's a mile-marker.  Because every year, around 200,000 American heroes are transitioning back into civilian life.  And whether it’s wartime or peacetime, many of our troops still serve far from home and families like yours sacrifice.  So Michelle and Jill have pledged to keep charging forward on this issue -- not just for the next nine months, but long after we leave office.
That’s why tonight, on this fifth anniversary, I want to renew Michelle and Jill’s call from the day they launched this effort.  I challenge every American to keep asking that simple question -- “How can I give back to these troops and families who have given me so much?”  Everybody should have that in their minds.  Because thanks to Joining Forces, we have answers in terms of how you can help. 
If you’re a business owner, hire more veterans and military spouses.  And if you don't know how to do it, let us know.  We'll tell you.  If you’re a teacher, reach out to the military students in your class.  And if you need ideas for how to provide more support, Joining Forces will let you know.  If you’re a mayor, or a coworker, or a neighbor, go to JoiningForces.gov to find out how you can make a difference for military families in your communities.  That’s how we can concretely show that we have your backs -- that it's not just lip service, but we're actually doing something concrete.   
That’s what today is about.  I could not be prouder of everything the American people have done and will continue to do through Joining Forces.  More importantly, I think I speak for Joe Biden to say I could not be prouder of two people who are as smart and charismatic and committed and dedicated -- what they’ve been able to accomplish with almost no budget, but just through sheer force of will and personality and commitment to you is something that leaves me in awe.  I am so proud of them.
Give it up for two champions for our troops and our veterans and our military families -- Michelle Obama and Jill Biden.  (Applause.)
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you to the Commander-in-Chief, President Obama, for that wonderful introduction.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
And, of course, I want to say thank you to my husband, Joe, the Vice President --
THE PRESIDENT:  He’s all right.  (Laughter.)
DR. BIDEN:  -- for always supporting and encouraging me to do as much as we can to show our military families how much we appreciate them.  
And tonight’s celebration wouldn’t have happened without the USO.  Let’s give the USO a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  For the past seven years, it’s been an honor to work with the USO on a number of issues affecting our troops, our veterans, and their families.  We’ve done everything together -- from stuffing care packages on Capitol Hill for women soldiers to hosting barbecues for wounded warriors at the Vice President’s residence, to block parties with military families on bases in Hawaii, Germany, Japan, Italy, Singapore, and throughout the United States.
Everywhere we go, the USO is there.  I feel like I’ve seen your volunteers so often that they’ve really become like family.  Just as you’ve been there for so many military families over the years, you’ve been there for us every step of the way.  You were there for my father during World War II.  You were there for our son when he deployed to Iraq.  And it was your work that inspired our work. 
Your mission is one of the reasons Michelle and I started Joining Forces in the first place -- to give all Americans the opportunity to step up and show their support for our military and their families.  You even helped Michelle and me launch our Joining Forces initiative with “Sesame Street.” 
So thank you for all the work that you continue to do and congratulations on the 75 years of incredible work that you do every single day for our warriors and their families around the world.  It’s making a difference in more lives than you will ever know. 
To all of the military and their families here tonight, you are our heroes.  Your selflessness and sacrifice on behalf of our country is so inspiring.  We can never do enough to thank you for your service and we hope you have a little fun tonight.
So now it’s my honor to introduce our country’s great supporter of our military and their families, my friend and Joining Forces partner, the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  All right, you guys!  (Applause.)  Yes!  (Applause.)  All right, we’re going to get this party started but before we begin, I have to thank my husband, Barack.  (Applause.) Thanks to Joe and Jill.  Thank you, J.D. and Jon and, most of all, thank all of you for joining us tonight.  I hope you all are good.  We’re so excited.
Let me just tell you, in order to get four of us on a stage -- it’s really hard.  (Laughter.)  And we’re doing it because of you.  We have cleared our schedules, we made this happen because we all care and you mean so much to us.  We are so incredibly honored to be here with all of you to celebrate the fifth anniversary of Joining Forces.  I can’t believe it’s been just five years. 
Make no mistake about it, Joining Forces is about one thing and one thing only:  It’s about you.  It’s about rallying this country to honor, support, and thank all of you -- (applause) -- our extraordinary servicemembers, our veterans, and of course, those military families who are so near and dear to my heart.  (Applause.) 
You just have to understand, we know what you do for our country every single day because over the past five years, through Joining Forces, Jill and I, we’ve had the pleasure of traveling across America and around the world, as you’ve heard, to bases and schools, communities and hospitals.  We’ve had the privilege of really getting to know so many of you.  The spouses who’ve endured those long deployments; all those difficult moves. 
Our military kids who bravely walk through the doors of yet another new school.  The wounded warriors who tell us they would do it all again for the chance to serve their country.  The heroes -- that is all of you who make such extraordinary sacrifices to keep us safe.
Now, let me tell you, in many ways you all have made our job with Joining Forces easy, because all we have to do is tell your stories.  That’s really it.  Because when people hear about you, they want to step up.  They want to express their gratitude.  They want to serve you as well as you’ve served this country.  You inspire people all across this country, and that is absolutely true for Jill and for me.  Getting to know all of you -- oh, you all just make us want to be better.  You inspire us to be better mothers and spouses, better public servants, better citizens, better human beings.  You do that. 
You inspire us to try every day to use this platform, this light to serve and support everything you do.  The courage, the honor, the boundless love for this country -- that’s what we’ve come to know.  And tonight, we just want you to know that serving you, doing this work with Joining Forces, of all the things that I have experienced -- we’ve experienced -- serving you has been one of the greatest privileges of our lives.  (Applause.)
AUDIENCE:  We love you!  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  We love you.  (Applause.)  We’re here tonight, gathered here to thank you.  Thank you for that privilege.  We’re here tonight to once again honor you for everything you’ve done and to tell you again and again how much we love you.
So tonight, we want you all to have some fun, all right?  (Applause.)  Please have the time of your lives.  (Applause.)  I hope there’s food or drink or something around here.  (Laughter.) Enjoy every single minute.  Soak this all in, because you’ve more than earned it, and we are proud of you all.  (Applause.)
So with that, I’m going to stop talking and turn things back over to Jon so that we can get this party started.  How ‘bout it? Thank you all so much.  God bless you.  (Applause.)
END
6:45 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 02, 2016
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden Celebrating the Fifth Anniversary of Joining Forces on the Voice
Universal Studios
Los Angeles, California
5:02 P.M. PDT
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you!  Oh, it’s great to be here.
MR. DALY:  By the way, throughout our studio audience tonight, our country’s finest active-duty servicemen and women, veterans and their families.  Welcome, all of you, and thank you so much also for being here tonight.  (Applause.)  Special night for us here at The Voice.  And I want to say welcome to the both of you again.  It is so great to have you here. 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks so much, Carson.  It’s great to be here.
DR. BIDEN:  We’re thrilled to be here.
MR. DALY:  Well, your Joining Forces initiative is celebrating its fifth anniversary, and, as we all know, May is Military Appreciation Month.  It’s only because of our military’s service and sacrifice that we all have a voice.
MRS. OBAMA:  Carson, we are so excited to be kicking off this anniversary with all of you at The Voice.  And we are particularly excited to be here with these extraordinary military families!  (Applause.)  Absolutely.
Over the past five years, through Joining Forces, Jill and I have had the privilege of traveling across this country and around the world to meet our troops, veterans and our military families.  And we are just in awe of them.  We’re in awe of their courage and their patriotism.
DR. BIDEN:  You know, this is personal.  Michelle and I have seen the incredible resilience of our military and their families, and we wanted to show them how much we appreciate their service with real, concrete action through employment, education and wellness initiatives.  Joining Forces gives all Americans the opportunity to show their support for those who serve and sacrifice so much for our country.  (Applause.)
MR. DALY:  Thank you so much.  So grateful to have you guys here.  (Applause.)  Mrs. Obama, I don’t want to put you on the spot, but if you’d like to have the honors of introducing our next special performance, we’d be honored.
MRS. OBAMA:  It is a pleasure.  In honor of our brave men and women in uniform, our veterans and their families, please welcome your Top 10 singing “Home.”  (Applause.)
(Performance begins.)
END
5:09 P.M. PDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
 April 30, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the Keel Laying Ceremony of the Future USS Delaware
As Prepared for Delivery
Newport News, Virginia
I would like to start by congratulating the entire Navy–Industry here at Newport News Shipbuilding, and those up north at General Dynamics Electric Boat Division, for your efforts in bringing this sub to life.  American shipbuilding is the best in the world.  What you do is so vital to our national defense.  And it’s as good as you — the welders, riggers, machinists, engineers, metalworkers, electricians — the outstanding tradesmen, specialists and professionals at Newport News.
Governor McAuliffe, Senator Carper and Representatives Scott and Forbes, it is great to be here with you.  As well as Vice Admiral Tofalo and all the distinguished Navy officers here today.  Commander Brian Hogan, I know this is a special day for you too, and I’m proud to share it with you.
These ceremonies are always special occasions, but the keel laying for this submarine is particularly meaningful to me.  As a proud military daughter, military mom and Delawarean, I am honored to serve as its sponsor.  It’s been nearly 100 years since the state of Delaware has had a Navy vessel bearing its name.  So this a proud day for the first state.  And, this great tradition of having civilian-sponsored Navy vessels helps to cement the critical connection between our service members and the civilians back home who love and miss them.
As a military mom and grandmother, there is no one I would rather be with today than you — the ones who stepped up to serve.  I am always inspired by the sacrifice and resilience of our military and their families.  The sailors who serve as the pre-commissioning crew of this sub, epitomize the ideals of honor, courage and commitment that define the United States Navy.  No matter what challenges you face, you serve with courage and distinction.
Forty-eight sailors and seven officers make up the Delaware crew so far.  You represent 27 states.  Many of your spouses and children — almost 60 kids — are stationed with you in Virginia, including the newest Delaware baby, Jacob.  Eighteen of you attended community college.  Getting into submarine service is not easy — you have to understand complex systems and undergo intense training.  As a community college teacher, it’s always great to see when community college students go on to do exceptional things.
To the crew, I am excited to begin this journey with you and I’m honored to be your shipmate for life.  I am deeply committed to serving all of you as well as you serve our country each and every day.  You are the reason we have the best, most powerful military in the world.  You go places human beings aren't supposed to be able to go — guarding the depths, protecting our seas and our shores.  It's a huge sacrifice to leave your family and spend months at a time under the sea, protecting us.  It takes a special kind of tough, determined, and smart woman or man, and we need you.
It's our duty to make sure that you have everything you need to stay safe and do your jobs.  You need the very best equipment and advanced technology that we can provide, and soon that will include the USS Delaware, thanks to the ingenuity and skill of the shipbuilders before us.
Five years ago this month, when First Lady Michelle Obama and I launched our Joining Forces initiative, our mission was clear: to give all Americans the opportunity to step up and show their support for those who sacrifice so much for our country.  In this role, I have been privileged to shine a light on the thousands of families who have taken on these challenges role without complaint.
Today, I am excited to begin a lifelong relationship with this vessel and to see this pre-commissioning crew come together and form the Delaware family, to go through exercises and sea trials, to see the Delaware christened and ultimately commissioned.  I’m also looking forward to getting to know your families along the way.
When I spoke to Commander Hogan a few weeks ago, it was more than clear how proud you are, Brian, to lead the crew of the USS Delaware.  I also learned that your family has moved twelve times throughout your Naval service and this will be your fifth tour of duty on a submarine. 
I’m sure that is also the case for many of the crew members and their families.  You all sacrifice so much to keep our country safe.  It’s not easy.  That’s why I believe we owe thanks every day to those who wear the uniform, but we also owe a debt of gratitude to their families as well.  Behind every sailor, is a family — the spouses, children, parents, grandparents and friends.
It’s a great privilege to serve as the sponsor of this submarine, but it’s also very personal.  As many of you know, the Bidens are a military family.  My son Beau served in the Delaware Army National Guard for twelve years, and deployed to Iraq for a year-long tour in 2009.  And, I couldn’t be more proud to have his son, my grandson Hunter here with me today.
The Navy is a big part of my life.  My father served in the Navy during World War II.  He enlisted just a few months before his 18th birthday, and served as a signalman in the Pacific.  I still have his signalman pin.  He took me, my mother and four sisters to watch the Blue Angels at Willow Grove Naval Air Station, to the Army-Navy football games, the Fourth of July parades, and on Flag Day there was always a flag waving outside our front door. 
It was through these moments that he instilled in all of us a sense of patriotism and pride in the Navy.  I’ll never forget seeing as a little girl, his picture in his dress whites, proudly displayed by the front door of my grandmom’s home.  Today, that picture hangs in my home.
Now, I’m part of this Navy family with the spouses, the children and crew of the USS Delaware, and all who will build her.  Today, I’m truly humbled.  This is one of my life’s greatest honors.
Thank you.  May God bless our service members and their families.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 13, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the White House Convening on Operation Educate the Educators
*AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY*
A White House Convening on Operation Educate the Educators: Recognizing and Supporting our Military-Connected Students
Washington, DC
Good morning, everyone!  It’s great to see all of you here at the White House today.  There are so many familiar faces from all of those who have been working with us on Operation Educate the Educators from the very beginning.  And, of course, it’s exciting to see so many new faces as well.
I’d like to start by thanking you, Secretary King, for that wonderful introduction.  As a former teacher, and the son of educators, you’ve dedicated your entire life to ensuring all students and teachers have the tools and resources they need to succeed.  And, since you were confirmed a month ago, you’ve been everywhere on behalf of our kids.  Thank you.
Dr. Mary Keller — and everyone at the Military Child Education Coalition — thank you for your tremendous friendship, leadership and support.  We couldn’t have done this without you.
I also want to thank Ron Astor, from the University of Southern California — we saw firsthand in 2012 the incredible work you were doing at USC.  We wouldn’t be here today without you.  Thank you.
Finally, thank you to the American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education — as well all of the original signatories of Operation Educate the Educators — for being here today and for your continued efforts to encourage teaching colleges to raise awareness about military-connected children on your campuses.
Five years ago this month, when First Lady Michelle Obama and I launched our Joining Forces initiative, our mission was clear: to give all Americans the opportunity to step up and show their support for those who serve in our military. As a lifelong educator and a military mom, this was personal. 
In this role, I have been privileged to shine a light on the thousands of families — and children — who have taken on these challenging roles without complaint.  They are my everyday heroes who often want no acknowledgment.  One of the best parts of my role as Second Lady is spending time with so many veterans and military families.  As I travel to bases across the country — and the world — I am always inspired by their strength and resilience. 
And, I have met teachers around the country who are meeting the challenges military children face in creative and heartwarming ways. I met a principal from San Diego who has worked with her staff to create transition rooms that offer military families a one-stop-shop for resources.  I’ve met teachers in Illinois who are using writing and art therapy to help National Guard kids with deployed parents express their fear and anxiety.  And, I met a teacher in Georgia who arranges parent-teacher conferences by Skype so that a parent deployed in Afghanistan can participate.
Last week, I had the opportunity to travel to Fort Riley — an Army Base in Kansas which is home to the 1st Infantry Division.  There are more than 8,000 military children living on base and the student population at Fort Riley Middle School is 98 percent military-connected.  I visited a few of their classrooms and met some pretty incredible teachers, student-teachers, parents and students.  Immediately, I saw the resilient nature of not just the students, but the entire community that has rallied to support them.  Instead of telling you about what I saw at Fort Riley, I’d like to show it to you.
One of the students I met that day told me that her family moved to Fort Riley in the middle of the school year, and so she missed the auditions for the school play.  But, because her teachers knew how difficult transitions and starting over can be, they gave her the opportunity to be part of it.  That doesn’t always happen for military students. 
Fort Riley represents what I hope all schools could do for our military families: a community-wide effort — one in which Kansas State University has invested heavily in educating their teachers — to better serve the needs of their military students.
I’d like to take a moment to thank Dean Deb Mercer, from Kansas State University, for being here today and facilitating last week’s discussion with the KSU student-teachers at Fort Riley Middle School.  The work that you are doing — that your student-teachers are doing in the classroom — is so important.  Thank you.
Not only does it make a difference in the life of each and every student, but, as you can imagine, it means so much to our service members when members of their community reach out to support military families during deployments.
However, not every public school is in a military community where nearly all of the student population is military-connected.  Not every teacher, faculty member and administrator lives the same life as military families do, day-in and day-out.  And, in some cases, not all public schools and teachers have been afforded the opportunity and resources they need to truly understand how to recognize and support the needs of these unique and inspiring students.
That’s why we launched Operation Educate the Educators in 2011 — to encourage teaching colleges to adopt guiding principles to better prepare educators to meet the needs of military-connected students in the classroom — and that’s why we’re here today.  Most of the original 100 signatory institutions are with us today to share the best research and ideas in the fields of military connected children and education; to raise awareness about what's working and what's not working; and to chart a course forward on what more we can do to support and leverage the unique needs of military and veteran connected children.
This morning, you’ve heard from leading institutions on best practices, curriculum, scientific and empirical evidence, the need to evaluate the entire life-cycle and the changes in experience at each stage.  You’ve also learned about fostering resiliency, the need for deeper data, the importance of recognizing the diversity of the military-connected family, and how legislatively we can support our military connected students.
Everyone here today has stepped up to make a real difference, but going forward we must challenge ourselves to do even more.  There’s more that must be done to raise awareness for teaching training as well as reaching all of those teachers already in the classroom.  I believe we must reach out to other professionals that encounter these students on a daily basis — from counselors to the PTA — which is why I was so thrilled to be able to welcome these new stakeholder organizations here today.
I hope all of you will commit to including the military-child into your curriculum; that you will reach out to your colleagues at other teaching colleges and tell them about what you learned here, and ask them to make the same commitment that you have made.  Leverage your understanding to push for further research at your schools.  We know there’s a need for more data on our military-connected kids.  We also know that the results of this data can have far-reaching implications into what is needed to support the resiliency and adaptability of children across this nation.
For those of you not associated with an education institution, please think through how you personally — and through your organization — can raise awareness about the unique needs of military-connected students.
I want you to know — as a military mom and as an educator — your efforts are appreciated.  The smallest act of kindness can make more of a difference in the lives of so many military students and their families than you might realize.  You got into education because you feel you can make a difference in the lives of students.  Military students will go unnoticed unless you step up to help.  It’s so simple: a word; an act; a deed.  You have the power to change someone’s life.
God bless our troops, and their families. 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
 April 11, 2016
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the American Association of Education Researchers Annual Meeting
*AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY*
American Association of Education Researchers Annual Meeting
Washington, DC
Good afternoon, everyone!  Thank you, Jeannie, for that nice introduction, and thank you AERA for making time for me today to address your annual meeting.  I’m honored to be here with so many esteemed colleagues.
Today, I want to talk to you about two of my passions: education and supporting our military families.  My father was a signalman during World War II.  Our son Beau served a year in Iraq.  The Bidens — we are a military family.  And, as a lifelong educator the way we reach out to military children in our classrooms is especially close to my heart.
In my experience, most military children you speak with will tell you they’re just like everyone else.  But, as we all know, most military children face circumstances that other children do not.  Military children encounter multiple moves across the country and around the world; deployments of a parent missing special and typical moments of childhood; and the re-integration period when families try to go back to normal; all while facing the visible or invisible wounds of war.  And, unfortunately, some military children encounter a new title “Gold Star Child” — when their family pays the ultimate price of service: the death of a mom or dad while deployed. 
Over the course of the last seven years I have traveled and met with military children and their parents and teachers all around the world — and one word — resilient — is always used to describe them.  In fact, last week, I had the opportunity to visit a middle school at Fort Riley in Kansas.  Fort Riley is an Army Base, home to the 1st Infantry Division, with a population of nearly 50,000: more than 18,000 active duty service members; almost 25,000 family members; and, over 3,000 retirees.  At Fort Riley the deployment cycle is constant.  Families are on their sixth and seventh.  One spouse told me she had moved 26 times.
Today, there are more than 8,000 military children living on base.  I visited Fort Riley Middle School — one of the six public schools on base.  There, 98 percent of the student population is military-connected.  I visited their classrooms.  I saw how one thoughtful teacher was using the Google Cardboard box app to study Ancient Rome — while culling first person narratives from students whose families had served in Italy.  She was embracing the unique experiences of these students to show them how special they were to have lived in more than one place.  It was so creative!  And thoughtful!  And, what a smart and easy way to recognize these students and make them feel good about moving, which on average, most have done 6 to 9 times.
This school took other simple steps to involve deployed parents in their children’s education by skyping for parent conferences; daily texting between parents and teachers to keep up on a student’s progress; and, recognizing those parents with a school entryway photo display.
As you can see — these are easy steps to meet the needs of military children and their parents.  Fort Riley is right down the street from Kansas State University where faculty has invested heavily in specifically educating their teachers to better serve the needs of military kids.  At Kansas State University they have developed a class devoted entirely to the education of military-connected children.
From top to bottom, from General Grisby to the newest arriving private, Fort Riley is structured to support the wellbeing and readiness of its soldiers and their families.  When soldiers know that their family is well cared for, they become better warriors.  And, our country is better served and kept safe.
Fort Riley represents the best of us, in many ways.  All military kids should be recognized, appreciated, and cared for this way.  But, not all communities are like Fort Riley.
In 2010, I visited troops with my husband, Joe, at Camp Victory in Iraq for the Fourth of July holiday.  It was there I accidentally met a general, and heard a story that changed me.  My staff and I needed a walk after the long flight to Iraq.  We were staying in one of Sadam Hussein’s former palaces that had been outfitted as a hotel of sorts for folks visiting the base.  It was there that we ran into three generals.  One of them asked for a photo and thanked us for coming, especially at a time when the wars seemed to be off the front pages and out of the nightly news.
We talked for a few minutes.  I told him that First Lady Michelle Obama and I wanted to work on issues on behalf of military families.  So, he left me with a story that I will never forget — a story about acknowledgement.  At his 6-year-old daughter’s school Christmas pageant, one of her classmates suddenly burst into tears when the “Ave Maria” was played.  As her teacher took her off stage and comforted her.  She learned that this had been the song that had been played at her father’s funeral.  He lost his life while serving in Iraq. Her teacher — and the school — were unaware that she was a military child.  Even more so, a Gold Star Child.
The general and I parted ways but I couldn’t sleep that night.  As a teacher — as a military mom — I was shocked.  How could we be missing this?  I knew that all teachers would want to understand that little girl's experience.  And, it made me realize that teachers need to be aware of the kids in their classroom who are military children.  They need to know what these kids are going through and what additional stresses they might be under.
The next morning, I called my team together and asked them to think through a strategy that would help us better recognize and care for military kids in their schools and classrooms.  This is where Operation Educate the Educators was born.
In the United States today, there are over 4 million children of Active Duty, National Guard, Reserves and post-9/11 veterans.  More than eighty percent of military children are educated in public schools.  And, on average, these children move every two- years and attend six to nine different schools before graduating from high school.  Frequent school changes mean you have to start over in a new community; adapt to a new culture or language; make new friends; and, try out again for the same sports team.
We know military parents do everything they can to make those transitions as smooth as possible, but it’s not easy.  That’s why First Lady Michelle Obama and I launched Joining Forces in the first place — we wanted to support and honor all those who serve and sacrifice so much on our behalf.  And, with the help of organizations like the Military Child Education Coalition (MCEC), Operation Educate the Educators is an effort to encourage teaching colleges to recognize military children in their curriculum.  To date, more than 100 universities have signed up to train thousands of future teachers. 
To keep building awareness for the importance of this teacher training, I’m convening original signatory schools from all across the country at the White House on Wednesday.  We will discuss best practices and research; share examples of syllabi and course materials; and, we’ll encourage even more schools to adopt the Operation Educate the Educator’s guiding principles.  This training, which builds awareness of the experiences of military children, is key to promoting their success in the classroom.
So, what can you and your universities do to help our military students?  Today, even though there are over 2 million military- and veteran-connected students in our K-12 classrooms, these groups of children are mostly absent in the research agendas of educational researchers, educator training programs, and community partnerships with universities. 
Imagine what a difference it would make if every university included military awareness in their curriculum.  All military-connected children would have teachers and principals, counselors and nurses in their schools who recognized and understood their experience.  We would have research-based knowledge about effective practices and policies that are most impactful to military kids in school environments.
Educational research and over a decade of experience tells us that schools are essential to providing for the unique needs of this very special population of America's children.  There are great examples of public schools across the nation that serve veteran- and military-connected students well — as I saw at Fort Riley Middle School.  These schools need to be studied and documented by researchers like all of you here today; they can serve as evidence based examples for the nation.
But, we are making strides.  For example, in December, the President signed the Every Student Succeeds Act, which includes a vital provision to identify and track military dependent students.  This data will allow you to study the unique strengths and special circumstances of military-connected students.  In addition to Kansas State University, I’ve had the opportunity to visit George Mason, Old Dominion, and the University of Southern California, which have all been leading the way on research in the military family space.  I encourage you to acquaint yourself with their work.  MCEC serves as an informal repository for the best examples of research, partnerships, materials, and thought-leadership in this space.
This is all great work, but there’s more to be done.  That’s why the U.S. Government’s Institute of Education Sciences has a call out for grant proposals on research regarding highly mobile students, which includes military-connected children.
Today, I’m asking each of you — as education professionals and researchers — to do more. Find ways to include military- and veteran-connected children as a diversity group in your research.  Let’s build the knowledge base that allows us to have accurate information on these kids. AERA has prepared a link for you to sign up and get the most recent research examples and materials.  It’s vitally important to shine a light on both schools and innovators that are working diligently to improve social, emotional and academic outcomes for military kids.  And, encourage other schools to follow their lead.
Educators have always been at the forefront of our nation’s challenges — I urge you to continue that proud tradition.
I want to leave you with one more story.  A little bit closer and more personal.  When my son Beau deployed to Iraq — that was a very tough time for our entire family.  What kept us going were the many people who found ways to support our family that year, through so many acts of kindness.  At my grand-daughter Natalie’s school, her teacher hung a photo of Beau’s unit outside the door of her classroom.  So, everyone who walked into the room would know that her daddy was away at war.  Believe me. That photo of her dad on the wall meant the world to Natalie, and it meant the world to me and my husband Joe, too.
It’s small acts of kindness like that — that any teacher in America can do — that can make all the difference in the lives of military families.  It only requires a bit more awareness and understanding.  That's what this initiative is all about.  It requires data and statistics to highlight the challenges faced by military kids in our schools.  They’ve been through so much — these kids, their parents have had our backs by serving in these wars... serving our country.  Let’s always have theirs backs, too.
Thank you for having me here today.  God bless our troops and their families.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 March 15, 2016
Remarks by President Obama, Vice President Biden, and Prime Minister Kenny of Ireland at St. Patrick's Day Reception
East Room
4:59 P.M. EDT
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Hello, folks!  Welcome to the White House.  Folks, my name is Joe Biden.  I work for Barack Obama.  (Applause.)  And I have the great honor of introducing our next three guests.  
In 1963, President Kennedy addressed the Irish parliament and said, “Our two nations, divided by distance, have been united by history.”  Today we celebrate that shared heritage that has defined so many of us as individuals, and it’s defined our country, as well.
And it’s clear why this day is so important to many of you, and to me and the President, who have ancestors who are from Ireland, who left behind everything to find a new home and find a place in that Promised Land -- America.  In the face of oppression, they held strong, strong, strong beliefs.  They planted deep roots, and they looked to the future.  It’s the immigrant story of all who came here.  
And the truth is that the greatest contribution the Irish brought to this country is a set of values:  hard work, family, a sense of community, pride, faith, and idealism.  
My mother had an expression -- and I mean this sincerely -- she talked about being Irish was about family, faith, but most of all, it was about courage.  She said, because without courage, you cannot love with abandon.  And to be Irish is to be able to love with abandon -- to be able to dream.  
Oscar Wilde said, “Yes, I’m a dreamer, for a dreamer is one who can only find his way by moonlight.  And his punishment is that he sees the dawn before the rest of the world.”  Millions -- millions -- of Irish men and women look to that dawn, and they forge their dreams into the foundation stones that literally formed this great nation of ours, all believing in something that defines America in a single world.  The uniqueness of this country, in my view, can be summed up in one word.  We're all about possibilities.  Anything -- anything -- is possible.
That's who we are as Americans.  In my view, that's the Irish of it.  I felt it.  My family has felt it.  All of you have felt it.  And the three people I’m about to introduce, they have felt it, as well.
Ladies and gentlemen -- my friend, the President of the United States, Barack Obama; the Taoiseach of Ireland, Enda Kenny; and his wife, Fionnuala.  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Welcome to the White House, everybody.  (Applause.)  Happy St. Patrick’s Week.  Once again, today is not technically St. Paddy’s Day.  And once again, this does not seem to bother any of you one bit.  (Laughter.)  But if you are lucky enough to be Irish, you’re lucky enough.  (Applause.)  
This, of course, is one of my favorite events.  I get to welcome my people.  (Laughter and applause.)  And the Obamas of Leinster are nothing if not welcoming.  We’ve got “trad.”  We’ve got pints of black.  It’s up to you to provide the “craic.”  (Applause.)  
This is my eighth St. Patrick’s Day as President.  And this is my 25th set of St. Patrick’s Day remarks as President.  This is true.  When you include the speeches I’ve given in Dublin and Northern Ireland, we are pushing 30.  But, fortunately, the Irish are not short on inspiration.
Everybody here is Irish -- I am positive of it.  There’s some particularly “indomitable Irishry” in the house.  But we are thrilled to once again host Taoiseach Enda Kenny.  Give him a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  His wife, Fionnuala -- give her a bigger round of applause.  (Applause.)  And we are in the presence of one of America’s great Irish-American heroes -- Vice President Joe Biden.  (Applause.)  
Blessed are the peacemakers -- and from Northern Ireland, we welcome their first female First Minister, Arlene Foster -- (applause) -- and Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness.  (Applause.)  The UK’s Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Theresa Villiers is here.  Give her a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  And Irish Foreign Minister Charlie Flanagan -- they’ve done a great job of representing their governments in the negotiations that led to the Stormont House and Fresh Start Agreements.  So we're very proud of them.  (Applause.)  
And former Senator Gary Hart, as Secretary Kerry’s personal representative, has done an extraordinary job representing America -- (applause) -- along with our Consul General in Belfast, Dan Lawton.  Thank all of you.  (Applause.)  
In addition, our Ambassador to the United Kingdom, Matthew Barzun, is here, as is our Ambassador to Ireland, Kevin O’Malley. (Applause.)  As you can see and hear, although Kevin has only been in Ireland for 18 months, he has crammed in almost eight years of work.  One of his legacies will be his “Creative Minds” initiative, in which he’s been busy connecting the next generation of Irish and American leaders who will be singing in this room someday.  So, thank you, Kevin.  Your Mayo grandparents would be proud.  (Applause.)  
And one of the warmest women you’ll ever meet is Ireland’s Ambassador to the United States, Anne Anderson.  (Applause.)  I'm going to embarrass Anne for a second.  A few days ago, she became the first woman ever admitted into the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick.  (Applause.)  And to underscore what a big deal this is, only one other person ever has been “adopted” into that society. This is true -- it was this guy right here, George Washington.  So you are keeping good company, Anne.  Congratulations.  (Laughter.)  
Our Ambassador to Japan, Caroline Kennedy, is also here.  And she may have made the longest trip.  And although Caroline never likes to draw attention to herself, she’s out here somewhere.  (Applause.)  Obviously, Caroline’s family will forever represent the centrality of Irish heritage to our American story.  
There’s a whole brood of Irish-American members of Congress here, as well, including from Caroline’s family -- Joe Kennedy, who’s a new father to a baby girl.  (Applause.)  That's worth congratulating.  You can't beat daughters.  If anyone is in need of a good song, Joe Crowley has one of the finer singing voices in Washington.  (Laughter.)  But, Joe, please wait until I'm done speaking.  (Laughter.)  
Now, some of you may have seen a front page of the Galway City Tribune last summer that blared, in huge print, “He’s On the Way!  Hopes that Obama will make Paddy’s Day speech in Eyre Square.”  I don't know how this rumor got started.  It might have been somebody on my staff who just wanted another trip to Ireland.  (Laughter.)  But I do have joyous memories of my own trips to the Emerald Isle.  And Ireland really is, as Seamus Heaney described it -- a place that can “catch the heart off guard and blow it open.”  Most of all, I remember how the Irish people made me feel so at home -- like my cousin Henry, and his pubkeeper, Ollie, who are here again today.  (Applause.)  There you go!  They’re around here somewhere.  
So I now understand what President Kennedy meant when he said that once he couldn’t run again, he’d endorse the Democratic candidate who would promise to appoint him ambassador to Ireland. (Laughter.)  I would like to point out I have not yet endorsed -- (laughter.)  A certain commitment, quietly made, would not hurt.
Of course, for the Irish, home is everywhere.  And perhaps no other country in the world is more “everywhere” than the United States.  We are braided together in so many ways, America and Ireland.  We’ve been for centuries, through history and bloodline.  We’ve waged war side by side.  We’ve waged peace side by side.  We are family and we are friends. 
This year marks the 100th anniversary of the 1916 Proclamation.  And I’m struck with how ahead of its time the proclamation was.  It was a daring document; one which its authors were very particular to address to “Irishmen and Irishwomen.”  It’s built around “religious and civil liberty, equal rights and equal opportunities,” and “cherishing all the children of the nation equally.”
Cherishing all the children of the nation equally.  That's a vision statement 100 years ago, and it would be a visionary statement today.  It's a universal value, like the ones in America’s own founding documents, that compels us to continually look forward; that gives us the chance to change; that dares us, American and Irish alike, to keep toiling towards our better selves.
Cherishing all the children of the nation equally means striving to make sure they grow up with equal rights and equal opportunities.  And I should point out that Ireland, last year, legalized marriage equality, and a month later, America was proud to join you.  (Applause.)  This year, New York’s St. Patrick’s Day parade is allowing Irish LGBT groups to march for the very first time.  (Applause.)  As Ambassador Anderson has said, “Irish America is making a statement:  There are no second-class citizens, no children of a lesser God.”
Cherishing all the children of the nation equally means making our immigration system smarter and fairer and more just.  I think of something powerful that the Taoiseach said here a few years ago about people “waiting to be herded into ships; mothers soothing children, perhaps not even their own; husbands calling for wives, and wives calling for husbands -- two peoples who would cross that single dividing ocean, the Irish to freedom; the Africans to slavery.”
My own daughters have the blood of both peoples, Irish and Africans, running through their veins.  And that makes them something more powerful -- it makes them Americans.  All of us come from someplace else.  America is made of generations of men and women who crossed oceans and borders to come here, some in extraordinarily dire circumstances.  Tireless waves of immigrants -- from Ireland, yes, but also Italy and Germany, from Russia and China, Southeast Asia, from Latin America and Africa.  And many set down roots and became some of our most influential citizens. 
We encourage the latest generation of eligible immigrants -- some 8.8 million permanent residents, including many Irish -- to take the same step in their American journey.  Many are students who, except for the circumstances of their birth, are as American as my own daughters, as Joe’s children and grandchildren -- students who bravely came out as undocumented in the hopes that they could earn the right to become citizens and make a difference in the country that they love.  
Our neighbors, our classmates, our friends -- they did not come here in search of a free ride.  They came to work, and to study, and to serve in our military, and above all, to contribute to our success.  That is the American Dream.  And the American Dream is something that no wall will ever contain.  (Applause.)  
Cherishing all the children of the nation equally means nurturing a lasting peace in Northern Ireland.  Eighteen years of peace means a whole generation has grown up living the dreams of their parents and grandparents.  To travel without the burden of checkpoints, or roadblocks, or soldiers on patrol.  To enjoy a sunny day free from the ever-present awareness that violence could blacken it at any moment.  To befriend or fall in love with whomever they want.  And while so many of you in this room negotiated the terms of peace, the fate of peace is up to our young people.  After all, 18 years of peace means that peace can vote now.  So we have to keep setting an example, through our words and our actions, that peace is a path worth pursuing.  
The Irish author, Colum McCann, who America now claims as our own, I understand is here today.  Where are you, Colum?  He’s an excellent writer.  He may be -- he’s all the way in the back. I love his books.  There he is right there.  (Applause.)  Colum once wrote, “Peace is indeed harder than war, and its constant fragility is part of its beauty.  A bullet need happen only once, but for peace to work, we need to be reminded of its existence again and again and again.”  
That’s what so many of you have worked to do -- again and again and again.  And the world has noticed.  As I said in Belfast, hope is contagious.  And you’ve designed a hopeful blueprint for others to follow.  You’re proof of what’s possible. I’m very proud that my administration has played a part in helping you to make hope one of your greatest exports.  (Applause.)  
In closing, on the occasion of my final St. Patrick’s Day with all of you --
AUDIENCE:  Nooo --
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, I mean, we may meet in a pub in Dublin or something.  (Applause.)  I'm saying, in the White House.  (Laughter.)  And my 30th set of remarks for an Irish audience, I’d like to close with a poem from an Irishwoman, Eavan Boland, that she wrote about a 30th anniversary.
this is the day to think of it, to wonder:
all those years, all those years together --
the stars in a frozen arc overhead,
the quick noise of a thaw in the air,
the blue stare of the hills -- through it all
this constancy:  what wears, what endures.
To the constancy of our enduring friendship.  May Ireland and America forever cherish and brilliantly sustain all our sons and daughters equally.  
Happy St. Paddy’s Day, everybody.  Goodnight and may joy be with you all.  
Let me now introduce our honored guest, Taoiseach Kenny.  Please, come to the stage.  (Applause.)  
PRIME MINISTER KENNY:  (Speaks in Irish.)  Thank you, and you're all welcome.  
Mr. President; Mr. Vice President; Mr. Flannigan; First and Deputy First Minister; Ambassadors; ladies and gentlemen:  When I was outside, I said to the President, it’s not often you get the chance of speaking with the President of the United States, the Vice President of the United States, and my wife.  (Laughter.)  
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  There she is.
PRIME MINISTER KENNY:  And so I said, the election is over in Ireland.  There are a few things I want to say about it.  So I’m going to speak for two hours.  (Laughter.)  That was just a fleeting thought.  (Laughter.)  
Thank you, Mr. President.  It gives Fionnuala and myself, on behalf of the people of Ireland, the greatest of pleasure to mark St. Patrick’s Day/Week/time with you, a special time for the Irish family worldwide.  
And let me again thank you, President, for all the times we've been here, for the warmth of your hospitality, the generosity of your time, and the continued interest that you and your administration have shown for Ireland and Northern Ireland. Gary Hart, George Mitchell, Joe Biden, Kevin O’Malley, everybody -- thank you.  (Applause.) 
And actually the bowl of shamrock is more important than it looks because it’s a symbol.  It’s a link.  It’s a symbolic link, a symbolic claim going back these many St. Patrick’s Days. 
Now, you all know what happened.  A teenager was taken away from his home.  He was transported to Ireland.  He was put into slavery, mind sheep on a hillside.  He was a shepherd, yes, but he was also a slave.  And those who made him a slave had no idea that in time and in the process, they were also making him the saint and symbol of a nation.
Similarly, years later, having returned to the scene of his slavery, he picked up a little three-piece, piece of greenery, just to illustrate an idea.  You will understand that this was in the days before PowerPoint displays and so on.  And to St. Patrick, the shamrock was just a handy little piece of greenery, just a prop.  No more than that.  And that tiny piece of greenery became the quintessence, the instantly recognizable brand of a modern nation.  And more, here in this White House, designed by James Hoban, from Dublin, it has become a yearly reminder of the ties that bind our two nations.  And the ties that bind America and Ireland are ties of blood and kinship; ties of trade and tradition; ties of hopes and dreams.  
Mr. President, I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to you for your outstanding leadership over the last seven years, to thank you for all you've done for Irish-U.S. relationships in that time.  (Applause.) 
Sir, Mr. President, you came into office at the most challenging times in terms of the global economic situation.  And I believe that your steadfast and courageous leadership played a huge role in ensuring that the global recession did not become a global depression.  (Applause.)  
Leadership requires courage.  Ultimately, that's what politics is about -- the triumph of hope over hate.  Because when hate is deployed, it doesn't just diminish those who deploy it, it diminishes all of us.  Whereas hope, hope is that golden currency that never devalues, that never tarnishes.  And hope -- and not hatred -- was what animated the dreamers and the patriots in the 1916 rebellion in Dublin.  Hope -- not hatred -- was what animated great Presidents, like Lincoln, to turn enemies into friends.  
Very many of the Irish found hope in America.  They found opportunity.  They found challenge.  And they found a society that valued hard work and that valued contribution.  They became police officers, nurses, firefighters, domestic servants, dockers, coal miners, railroaders, and so on.  They built bridges and railways and docks and skyscrapers.
During my time as Taoiseach, we’ve reached out to the Irish diaspora as never before to see more of those descendants of those who left coming back to experience a new Ireland, where, in the words of Seamus Heaney, hope and history rhyme.
So, although a small country, we’ve always been committed to making a big difference in the world.  We know that any contribution that we can make to tackling global problems such as terrorism, hunger, climate change, can only be achieved through strong global partnership.
I want to applaud publicly President Obama’s tireless efforts on the world stage in promoting dialogue, common sense, and partnership in the pursuit of peace and a sustainable future for humanity.  (Applause.) 
Ask any of the 35 million Americans who now have the hope and the realization of health assistance in their time of need, and they can answer, Barack Obama delivered that for me.  (Applause.) 
In conclusion, let me again mention 1916.  As many of you know, the United States is the only country that was specifically mentioned in the 1916 Proclamation.  The signatories recognized, as they said, the support of our exiled children in America, a reference to the many millions of our people in this country who supported the cause of Irish freedom for generations.  The inscription is on the bowl:  Our exiled children in America.
Let me just conclude on this.  What St. Patrick did, whether he realized it or not, was actually the quintessence of great leadership -- or should I say, in the words of one more eloquent and more famous than I, the audacity of hope, and the determination to leave the world better than he found it, just like President Barack Obama.  (Applause.) 
And so now it is my pleasure and my privilege on behalf of the people of our country and the 70 million Irish people all over the world, to present this bowl of shamrock, tried and tested, to President of the United States Barack Obama. 
Thank you all very much.  Hope you have a wonderful evening.  (Applause.) 
END 
6:26 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 23, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden after a meeting with Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu
Dolmabahce Palace  
Istanbul, Turkey
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.  And I want to thank you and your wife, Dr. Davutoğlu, for your hospitality.  When you come to Washington and visit me and the President, I can't promise you something as magnificent as this, although we're incredibly proud of -- (laughter) -- you look out over the Bosphorus, you look -- I say to the press my greatest problem was concentrating on our conversation.  Fortunately the chairs were facing the wall, not the windows.  It’s just absolutely magnificent. 
 
And I sincerely mean it, Mr. Prime Minister, you and I have -- I think it’s not presumptuous to say -- built a close personal relationship, as well.  I trust you.  We trust one another.  And I should say to the press, we always scare the living devil out of our respective staffs because we start taking out maps.  (Laughter.)  And he and I start pointing.  And I can see the military guys on both sides going, oh, my God, what are they going to do?  But we usually get it right.  And I thank you very much for the -- for not only the discussion, but the precision of the discussion.
 
The Prime Minister and I have -- I hope a number of things in common -- but one is that we want to make sure -- because it’s such an important relationship, Turkey and the United States, that there is no misunderstanding -- that there is no misunderstanding; that where we agree, we agree with precision; where we have a disagreement, we state it flatly.  
 
And the truth is on the strategic questions we're discussing, there is no disagreement.  We do agree with you, Mr. Prime Minister, that in terms of their actions, Daesh and PKK, and al-Nusra, there’s no substantive -- they're terrorist groups.  They're simply terrorist groups.  
 
And here in Turkey, they threaten and do harm and are of severe consequence to the interests of the people of Turkey.  And we do recognize that.
 
And I want to begin by offering, though, my deep consolences to the Turkish people, as referenced yesterday after I came out of the Blue Mosque and the wonderful hospitality of the mufti.  And I was able to become -- the American press traveling with me is used to my saying things like this, but you made me a hero.  I was able to show my wife and my granddaughter the Blue Mosque, and they now think I’m important that I was able to do that.  But it was -- it is such a moving, incredible experience.  
 
And again, thank you for the hospitality.
 
But we did place a carnation at the site of the most recent bombing, the most recent atrocity committed by Daesh, where 10 German tourists were blown up.  But I said at the time, and I’ll say again, we Americans don't fail to understand how many Turkish citizens have been the victims of terror and continue to be.  So our hearts go out to the Turkish people and the families of the foreigners, in this case the Germans, who lost loved ones.  And we are determined collectively and together to wipe out these terrorist organizations.
 
We spent a great deal of time in our discussion -- we ran over -- because we were talking about our shared mission on the extermination of ISIL.  And we’ve gotten very precise -- very precise.  We do believe that our plans together have matured.  They’ve gotten more coordinated.  And we're increasingly making progress.  And I am confident that we will -- that that progress will be sped up as a consequence of our meeting today and our continued collaboration.  
 
And there is a thorough understanding that ISIL presents a clear and present danger not only to Europe, to the neighborhood, but particularly to Turkey.  And we have shown robust cooperation in the commitment to defeat ISIL in Turkey, and we’ve taken -- Turkey has taken some very important steps, very important steps to improve the security at its border.  And America and other coalition aircraft are now operating out of Turkish air bases so we can gather better information about ISIL activities.  We can ramp up our air campaign against ISIL targets to the highest tempo since the beginning of the campaign.  And we can better support local forces on the ground that we jointly support as they take back territory.
 
But today we agreed to do even more.  Today we discussed how we can improve the support of local Sunni Arab forces working to cut off what remains of ISIL’s access to the Turkish border.  And that's a priority for both our nations so that we can prevent new fighters and equipment from reaching ISIL and conducting attacks against Syria and so that the control now and after we defeat ISIL of the border is within Turkish control, that it’s secure, that there are no separate states sitting on your southern border.
 
And so together we continue to work toward a political resolution of the situation in Syria.  We are neither optimistic nor pessimistic.  We are determined in terms of how this beginning.  John Kerry is meeting in Saudi Arabia as we speak. We're meeting, all of us, in Davos.  The Prime Minister and I separately met with our counterparts, and we do know that it would be better if we could reach a political solution.  But we are prepared. We are prepared if that's not possible to make -- to have a military solution to this operation in taking out Daesh.
 
And again, ISIL is not the only existential threat to the people of Turkey.  The PKK is equally a threat, and we are aware of that.  Although we believe the vast majority of Kurds want to live in peace with everyone in society, I have to be absolutely clear, the PKK has shown no desire or inclination to do that.  And it a terrorist group plain and simple.  And what they continue to is absolutely outrageous.  
 
And I know -- we know, the world knows that your government, Mr. Prime Minister, has in the past tried to find a negotiated peace with the PKK, to lay down arms or leave.  And they have not, and you've been left with no option. 
 
But I hope and I’m certain that you will not give up the possibility of continuing to try to encourage a political solution.  But in the meantime, you must do what you need do to protect your people.
 
And we talked about the contribution that can be made in Iraq.  I’ve spent a great deal of time in Iraq.  One of the things we talked about is the way -- there is an expression, an old expression in America, there is more than one way to skin a cat.  But we talked about, and we hope we can work out with Ankara and Baghdad and all parties included is a joint and coordinated effort to defeat ISIL, take back Mosul, and make sure it does not become a proxy for any other country in the region, that it’s returned to the people of Mosul.  And that's who will occupy that city.  
 
And so we talked about potential modus vivendi to be able to do that.  I am not authorized, but I am sort of self-appointed to see if I can work out something between my good friend the Prime Minister of Turkey and my good friend the Prime Minister Iraq as to where we can work out a modus vivendi because we're all on the same page.
 
And so there’s much more to talk about.  We went into great deal, but I’m not going to take your time because we're all hungry.  (Laughter.)  No, because we're about to go to lunch.  And there’s a couple more subjects that we're going to raise.  I want to just mention, Mr. Prime Minister, how much I appreciate your commitment to try to end years of deadlock in the conflict on Cyprus.  Both -- I met with both parties on the island, they're moving toward a negotiated agreement.  I think it may be -- may be, God willing -- finally within the reach to see if we can reach a settlement.  Turkey is playing a critical role in advancing a just and lasting settlement.  And I want to thank the Prime Minister for the strong support of what has turned out to be, in my view after dealing with this for years and years and years, genuinely Cyprus-led discussions, which is the key ultimately.
 
And we're also working together to strengthen the energy security of Europe.  But it is our view that Turkey has an opportunity to play a historic role, a critical role as a lynchpin and a potential transit hub connecting the region from Azerbaijan to Israel to Iraq to Europe.  And it holds great potential.  And we are prepared to work with and be of any assistance we can in putting Turkey in that position.
 
So I greatly appreciate this opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister and I believe to genuinely make progress on a number of issues that are important to both our people.  So the partnership between our two nations is enduring.  It’s rooted in history.  It’s in the hearts of our people.  There are hundreds of thousands of proud Turkish Americans who make my nation stronger every day.  And I want to close by saying:  Turkey is a strategic partner.  The success of Turkey -- economically, politically, and physically -- is overwhelmingly in the self-interest of the United States of America.  And I hope our Turkish friends feel that reciprocally, that our success is theirs, as well.
 
So thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  And thank you all for taking the time to come and listen.
 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 14, 2016
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Guatemala President-Elect Jimmy Morales at a Bilateral Meeting
Intercontinental Real Guatemala
Guatemala City, Guatemala
PRESIDENT-ELECT MORALES:  (As interpreted.)  For us it’s a privilege to have you here and to have you having an interest in the nation.  We have a lot of projects together, and that we have initiated in the past, and we want to continue.  And there is a saying that you don't have what you haven’t done.
 
I will not ask anything for myself, but I will ask something for the Guatemalans.  There is a petition -- it’s a very difficult position -- but I want to give you this petition.  It comes from 10 senators and 139 legislators (inaudible).
 
For the rest, we are (inaudible) responsibility, we want to work together.  We want to work for Latin America.  And excuse me for my bluntness, and for being so direct on this occasion, but this is something that we need to do for our (inaudible). 
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. President, let me begin by saying congratulations -- President-elect, let me say congratulations.  And I’m not going to present my list.  (Laughter.)  Because I don't want him to miss his  .
 
The first time I visited your country several years ago to meet with your colleagues from El Salvador and Honduras, they made a request:  Could I find a billion dollars?  This is modest comparatively speaking.  
 
Mr. President, I’ve engaged in the business of foreign policy for a long time.  And I truly believe that the next great success story in this hemisphere can be the Northern Triangle -- Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador.  
 
As I told your colleagues for the last three years, the single biggest impediment for that success is corruption.  And on behalf of the President and myself, I want to compliment you on your head-on commitment to take on corruption in your country and the region.  It was not lost on the American people that thousands upon thousands of Guatemalans demanded change -- elected you and insist that you finish the job, which I’m sure you will.
 
We want to be your partner.  I always say, Mr. President, to a foreign leader that I’m not going to presume to tell you what’s in your interest.  That's for you to decide.  But I know what’s in our interest.  And I hope we can find our interest to be the same.  We have to deal with corruption.  We have to deal with the desperate need for more reliable energy in the region.  We have to deal with the notion of providing a much better environment to conduct business and attract foreign capital.  We have to deal with a whole range of things.  But I believe they are within our power to do so.
 
At the President’s request, he commissioned me to come up with a plan for the region.  And with your predecessors, we spent a lot of time eye-to-eye, person-to-person agreeing on how we would proceed.  And we set specific benchmarks that would have to be met.  That allowed me to go to the United States Congress and say, ladies and gentlemen, give us the total of $750 million to help Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador meet the needs that they have identified that are holding their countries back.  And so we are in this with you.  As long as you continue to meet your commitments -- and you have thus far -- we are all in.  
 
I’ll conclude by reminding you how we got to be involved.  When I was a senator, and Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, I wrote Plan Columbia.  And the region has been asking the United States for another Plan Columbia for the region.  I was in the Middle East and I got a phone call from the President in 2014.  He said, would I fly to Guatemala to meet with the regional Presidents because we have a rising crisis of -- referred to as unaccompanied children on the U.S. border and families?
 
We sat down and we worked out the way to deal with that issue.  And as a consequence of that, it freed up my ability to go to the Congress and get approaching a billion dollars.  It’s a very difficult time around the world relating to migration overall, as well as specific issues that have existed for a long time in Central America. 
 
And we want to continue to work with you in a humane and decent way to deal with this issue.  And the way to do that is to build your economy, build your security, build your country so p have no desire to take a dangerous journey with an organized gang in a difficult circumstance risking the lives of children and others.
 
And with regard to your new request, which is not new -- your request, let me say I promise we’ll take it under consideration.  It’s a matter of discussion as I speak in the United States of America.  And we’ll try our best to figure out a resolution with you.  
 
You and I are public servants.  We're elected officials.  And we know public opinion matters a lot.  The situation in our border deteriorates to what it was in 2014, there will be no possibility of this happening.  You have a genuine case.  Reality is real.  It may get worse in 2016.  I personally promise you I will work again on it, see where we can go.  And I spend so much time in matters relating to this area, my constituents are beginning to think that maybe I should run for office here.  (Laughter.)  But I’m here to support you.  And again, congratulations.
 
END
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 09, 2015
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to The Ukrainian Rada
The Rada
Kyiv, Ukraine
11:58 A.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  What a great honor for me to be able to represent my country before such an august audience.
Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, Mr. Chairman, members of the Rada, ladies and gentlemen, I am deeply honored to be invited to speak to you today at a moment marked by great opportunity, as well as great uncertainty for the people of Ukraine.  The stakes for your country and the expectations of your people have never been higher because Ukraine, as you know better than I, has been here before. 
In the West, as here we remember, the Orange Revolution -- young men and women who filled the Maidan a decade ago demanding that their voices and their votes both be respected.  They refused to back down in the face of rigged elections, and they succeeded.
But as history tells us and shows, and as we know, Ukraine’s leaders proved incapable of delivering on the promise of democratic revolution.  We saw reforms put in place only to be rolled back.  We saw oligarchs uninterested in change ousted from power only to return.  Reformers persecuted, thrown in prison as political retribution.  And the bright flame of hope for a new Ukraine snuffed out by the pervasive poison of cronyism, corruption, and kleptocracy. 
Nearly a decade later, that flame of hope was reignited by thousands of brave Ukrainians, some of you in this room, storming the Maidan, demanding a Revolution of Dignity.  The world was transfixed.  This time they were not going to be denied the future that so many of your country have longed for, for so long.
And the world was horrified when peaceful patriots were met by violence.  They stayed at the Maidan day and night, facing down the Berkut in riot gear.  For the first time since the Middle Ages, the bells of St. Mary [*sic] raised the alarm, calling the citizens of Ukraine to reinforce their brothers and sisters on the Maidan.  Tens of thousands heeded the call bringing with them food, clothing, blankets, medical supplies, and their support.  As the world watched -- and I was literally on the phone with your former President urging restraint -- as the world watched, the final assault came.  Amidst fire and ice, snipers on rooftops, the Heavenly Hundred paid the ultimate price of patriots the world over.  Their blood and courage delivering to the Ukrainian people a second chance for freedom.  Their sacrifice -- to put it bluntly -- is now your obligation.
You have a historic opportunity to be remembered as the Rada that finally and permanently laid in place the pillars of freedom that your people have longed for, yearned for, for so many years.
I need not tell you this is a joint responsibility.  The President, the Prime Minister, the members of this august body -- all of you must put aside parochial differences and make real the Revolution of Dignity.
My country, too, was born of revolution.  But the battle for our independence was underway well before the first shots were fired.  It began when men of conscience stood up in legislative bodies representing every region in what was then Colonial America -- Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Virginia, very different interests -- and declared in each of their regions the inherent rights of free people in different documents, in different language -- but the inherent right to be free.
They took a vast continent and a diverse people -- what John Adams, one of our Founding Fathers and future Presidents once said -- called “an unwieldy machine”.  And they molded that unwieldy machine into a united representative democracy where people saw themselves as Americans first and citizens of their region second.
But our union remained imperfect, our democracy incomplete.  Seventy years later we went through a second testing during the American Civil War, which nearly tore our still young country asunder.  Winning on the field of battle wasn’t sufficient to unite our country.  To end slavery and the regional differences we had, to grant former slaves citizenships and rights, the United States Congress assembled -- had to amend our Constitution. 
Individual members of that Congress lost their jobs standing up to do the right thing.  Everyone took real political risks to overcome entrenched opposition for the good of achieving a truly United States of America.
In the end, it came down to extraordinary patriots -- individuals putting their personal needs behind the needs of their nation, their narrow interest behind unity. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I believe the President, the Prime Minister, every member of this body now faces a similar test of courage. 
To quote an early American patriot, Thomas Paine, “These are the times that try men’s souls.”  These are the times that try men’s souls.
This is your moment.  This is your responsibility.  Each of you -- if you’ll forgive me for speaking to you this way in your body -- each of you has an obligation to seize the opportunity that the sacrifices made in the Maidan, the sacrifices of the Heavenly Hundred.  Each of you has an obligation to answer the call of history and finally build a united, democratic Ukrainian nation that can stand the test of time.
Edmund Burke said it best in 1774, speaking to his constituency in Bristol, England.  Here’s what he said:  “Parliament is a deliberative assembly of one nation, with one interest -- that of the whole; where not local purpose, not local prejudice ought to guide, but the general good.”
I respectfully suggest this is a standard for which each of you will be judged.  This is the standard by which your grandchildren and great grandchildren, your progeny will judge whether or not you had the moral courage to put the general good above local prejudice.  And this is all within your power.  It’s within your hands.  Nobody else’s -- yours.
You can bend the arc of history of this nation toward greater justice and opportunity for the Ukrainian people, and you can do it now. 
I’ve had the great privilege and opportunity afforded to me by all of you over the past two years to meet with representatives representing all sectors of this country -- east and west, including the illegally occupied Crimea -- from all walks of life -- civil society, members of this body, your military leaders, your clergy.  I’ve met with souls who stood on the Maidan -- some of you are now in this chamber -- a place which I visited yesterday.  All one has to do is look at the photographs of the Heavenly Hundred at that spontaneously erected monument where I stood yesterday.  Just look at the photographs.  This is not hyperbole.  I’m not trying to be unduly -- this is real.  As a foreigner, all I have to do is look at the photographs.  See the photographs of young men as early as their early 20s to those in their early 80s.  Every one of them were joined in common purpose, a Revolution of Dignity.
My father had an expression he repeated a thousand times growing up:  Every man and woman is entitled to be treated with dignity.  Everyone.  That's what your new revolution was about:  dignity.
And those martyrs still give voice to the timeless ideals and the timeless ideas, the universal values that unite free people all around the world.  I visited every part of this world.  There’s fewer than a handful of countries I’ve not been in.  I’ve traveled over 1.3 million miles just since being Vice President.  The whole world is watching you.  That's a fact.  They're watching you because their hopes for your success as you fight both the unrelenting aggression of the Kremlin and the cancer of corruption will impact on them. 
In both these struggles you have the unwavering support of the United States of America and the American people -- including nearly 1 million proud Ukrainian Americans.  You have the united support of Europe -- Western, Central, and Eastern Europe -- all invested in your democratic success because your success goes to the heart of an enduring commitment to a Europe whole, free, and at peace.  If you fail, the experiment fails.  It is no exaggeration to say that the hopes of freedom-loving people the world over are with you because so much rides on your fragile experiment with democracy succeeding.
It’s equally important, by the way, for aggressors around the world to understand that they can't use coercion, bribery, sending tanks and men across a border to extinguish the dreams and hopes of a people.  For if you succeed, that message is sent around the world. 
The President asked me back in the late winter, 2009, to come to Europe to speak at the Munich Conference to lay out the principles that would guide our administration; the fundamental elements of American foreign policy under the Obama-Biden administration.  And what I said then I will repeat now.  I said, we will not recognize any nation having a sphere of influence.  Sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances.  Period.  Period.  (Applause.)
In the 21st century, nations cannot -- and we cannot allow them to redraw borders by force.  These are the ground rules.  And if we fail to uphold them, we will rue the day.  Russia has violated these ground rules and continues to violate them.  Today Russia is occupying sovereign Ukrainian territory.  Let me be crystal clear:  The United States does not, will not, never will recognize Russia’s attempt to annex the Crimea.  (Applause.)  It’s that saying -- that simple.  There is no justification.
And as Russia continues to send its thugs, its troops, its mercenaries across the border, Russian tanks and missiles still fill the Donbas.  Separatist forces are organized, commanded and directed by Moscow -- by Moscow.  (Applause.)
So the United States will continue to stand with Ukraine against Russian aggression.  We're providing support to help and train and assist your security forces, and we’ve relied on and rallied the rest of the world to Ukraine’s cause. 
I have spent hours -- as the President has -- talking to heads of state in Europe and around the world, making it clear that one of the tests for whether or not they are our allies is are they allied with your purpose.
America and Europe now stand together united in our commitment to impose tough economic sanctions on Russia.  And while Russian aggression persists, the cost imposed on Moscow will continue to rise.  The false propaganda that the Kremlin is disseminating in an attempt to undermine Ukraine and fracture Europe’s resolve will not work.  No one should mistake saber rattling and bombast for strength.  Let me say that again, no one should mistake saber rattling and bombast for real strength.
We're taking steps to bolster Europe’s resilience to Russian coercive tactics.  We are strengthening NATO as I speak, improving energy security as I speak, and attempting to help spur an economic revival throughout Europe.
The United States and Europe will maintain pressure until Moscow fulfills its commitments under the Minsk Agreement.  While there has been some progress in deescalating the violence, there can be no sanctions relief unless and until Russia meets all of its commitments under the Minsk Agreement.  (Applause.)
And I might add parenthetically, I don't think the Russian people fully understand what Putin is doing.  That's why he spends so much time hiding at home the presence of Russian forces here in your country.  Heavy weapons must be withdrawn from the frontlines.  The OSCE must be granted full, unencumbered access.  Russia must press the separatists to hold elections according to Ukrainian law and OSCE standards and disavow the illegal election that's just taken place.  Hostages held by Russia and its proxies must be returned.  Russian troops must leave.  The Ukrainian side of the border must be returned to Ukrainian control.  Unless all -- if they do all of that, and only if they do, Ukraine also has a responsibility it still has to fulfill -- including amnesty for those who have not committed capital offenses; granting devolved administration to the Donbas.  But we’ve made it clear to Russia and the world that continued delay and foot-dragging is unacceptable.  That includes elections in the Donbas.  They can only go forward as stipulated under the Minsk Agreement.  Full access to the media must be provided.  Ukrainian political parties allowed to compete openly.  Full and unobstructed OSCE election monitoring.  Full voting rights for the people displaced from their homes in the Donbas and living elsewhere in Ukraine.  And all weapons contained and kept under OSCE supervision.  That only happens if Russia lives up to its commitments, if Russia does its part.  If it does, then you must follow through with yours because this is the best chance to keep Donbas in Ukraine, end the conflict, and begin restoring Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.  (Applause.) 
It’s hard.  There’s nothing easy about what you have to do.  There’s nothing easy.  The pressure you will all get will be immense. 
I’d like to also speak directly to the people in the Donbas.  The alternative to what I just said is to continue to live under separatists thugs, criminals who deny humanitarian aid, keep out organizations like Doctors Without Borders, stealing lifesaving medicine to sell on the black market.  That's not a future.  That's not a future I believe any Ukrainian wants for their children.
That's why the Minsk Agreement needs to be implemented in full.  And truly free and fair elections are exactly what the Kremlin fears the most.  It’s not just your territory they covet; it’s your success that they fear.  For if free elections occur, and the people determine, as I am confident they will, that they want to remain and integral part of Ukraine, that they are Ukrainians first, that's what Russia fears.  That’s what Putin fears.
Because as all of you know the struggle for Ukraine’s freedom is not confined to the battlefields of the east.  Constitutional reform that includes judicial reform and decentralization does not compromise your sovereignty.  It enhances it.  It’s an important step to building a strong, new nation.  And it’s important to the Ukrainian-European future.
This issue of federalism is the thing that almost prevented our nation from coming into being.  Autonomous independent states, their determination to have their own police forces, their determination to have their education system, to have their own government under the united Constitution. 
But in addition, you also have a battle, a historic battle against corruption.  Ukraine cannot afford for the people to lose hope again.  The only thing worse than having no hope at all is having hopes rise and see them dashed repeatedly on the shoals of corruption.
And if the people resign themselves to exploitation and corruption for fear of losing whatever little they have left, that would be the death knell for Ukrainian democracy.  We’ve taken so many critical steps already.  But all of you know there’s more to do to finish this race.  Not enough has been done yet. 
As the Prime Minister and the President heard me often say, I never tell another man or another nation or another woman what’s in their interest.  But I can tell you, you cannot name me a single democracy in the world where the cancer of corruption is prevalent.  You cannot name me one.  They are thoroughly inconsistent.  And it’s not enough to set up a new anti-corruption bureau and establish a special prosecutor fighting corruption.  The Office of the General Prosecutor desperately needs reform.  The judiciary should be overhauled.  The energy sector needs to be competitive, ruled by market principles -- not sweetheart deals.  It’s not enough to push through laws to increase transparency with regard to official sources of income.  Senior elected officials have to remove all conflicts between their business interest and their government responsibilities.  Every other democracy in the world -- that system pertains. 
Oligarchs and non-oligarchs must play by the same rules.  They have to pay their taxes, settle their disputes in court -- not by bullying judges.  That's basic.  That's how nations succeed in the 21st century. 
Corruption siphons away resources from the people.  It blunts the economic growth, and it affronts the human dignity.  We know that.  You know that.  The Ukrainian people know that.  When Russia seeks to use corruption as a tool of coercion, reform isn’t just good governance, it’s self-preservation.  It’s in the national security interest of the nation.
Russia is trying to undermine the stability and sovereignty of Ukraine any way they can't, including squeezing Ukraine financially, trying to undermine your economy.  They view that as a cheaper way than sending tanks across the line of contact. 
So Ukraine must be strong enough to choose its own future, strongly.  Strong defensively.  Strong economically.  A strong system of democratic governance.
The United States is with you in this fight.  We understand we're with you afar.  It’s much harder for you than it is for us.  We’ve stepped up with official assistance to help backstop the Ukrainian economy.  We’ve rallied the international community to commit a total of $25 billion in bilateral and multilateral financing to support Ukraine.  It includes $2 billion in U.S. loan guarantees and the possibility of more. 
Yesterday I announced almost $190 million in new American assistance to help Ukraine fight corruption, strengthen the rule of law, implement critical reform, bolster civil society, advance energy security.  That brings our total of direct aid to almost $760 million in direct assistance, in addition to loan guarantees since this crisis broke out.  And that is not the end of what we're prepared to do if you keep moving. 
But for Ukraine to continue to make progress and to keep the support of the international community you have to do more, as well.  The big part of moving forward with your IMF program -- it requires difficult reforms.  And they are difficult.  Let me say parenthetically here, all the experts from our State Department and all the think tanks, and they come and tell you, that you know what you should do is you should deal with pensions.  You should deal with -- as if it’s easy to do.  Hell, we're having trouble in America dealing with it.  We're having trouble.  To vote to raise the pension age is to write your political obituary in many places. 
Don't misunderstand that those of us who serve in other democratic institutions don't understand how hard the conditions are, how difficult it is to cast some of the votes to meet the obligations committed to under the IMF.  It requires sacrifices that might not be politically expedient or popular.  But they're critical to putting Ukraine on the path to a future that is economically secure.  And I urge you to stay the course as hard as it is.  Ukraine needs a budget that’s consistent with your IMF commitments.
Anything else will jeopardize Ukraine’s hard-won progress and drive down support for Ukraine from the international community, which is always tenuous.  It’s always tenuous.  We keep pushing that support.
The Ukrainian people have long struggled to direct their own destinies, to carve out a place besides the mighty Dnipro, to claim their own identity, proud and distinct. 
A great poet Taras Shevchenko wrote verse after verse declaiming the spirit of Ukraine, urging his fellow Ukrainians rise up and claim their liberty.  His poem “The Testament” ends with this reflection.  And I quote:
Then, in the mighty family
Of all men that are free,
May be sometimes, very softly
You will speak of me?
May be sometimes very softly you will speak of me.  (Applause.)
Ladies and Gentlemen, I will speak of Ukraine.  I will speak of the writer who took a beating on the Maidan to put him in the hospital.  When asked why he sustained those injuries, why he was willing to endure it, he wrote: “People who don’t protest injustice, they have no future.” 
I will speak of the young mother who gave up a lucrative career working on government reform.  And then when asked why, she replied:  “I have two small children and I cannot fight in the east.  So this is what I can do for my country.”  (Applause.)
I will speak up for the university student who handed out food on the Maidan and later spoke about how those months changed.  She said:  “Now people don’t think about what Ukraine can give them but about what they can give Ukraine.”
I will speak of the men and women of this institution, a freely elected representative body of the people.  I will speak of the sacrifices you've made.  Nadiya Savchenko, the pioneering Ukrainian helicopter pilot who was elected to the Rada, despite being unjustly imprisoned in [sic] to this day.  I will speak of her bravery, and many others will, as well.  I will speak about how it’s up to all of you to ensure the people of this land, once and for all -- that mighty family of all men that are free. 
Ukraine’s moment.  It may be your last moment.  Please for the sake of the rest of us, selfishly on my part, don’t waste it.  Seize the opportunity.  Build a better future for the people of Ukraine.  
There was a famous American politician when I was a young senator.  He was in the other party -- very different ideology.  But he said -- once in response to a question, he said, in your heart, in your heart, you know it’s right.  In your heart, you know what’s right.  You know.  Do it.  As long as you remain on that path, as long as you honor the obligation to the Ukrainian people, you never have to worry or doubt America and the United States will be by your side. 
I hesitated to come to make this speech.  The reason I did is not because a lack of affection for your country.  But as a man who sat where you're sitting for 36 years as a United States senator, sometimes when a foreign leader would come to speak, I resented when he or she appeared to lecture us.  I hope I don't come across as hectoring or lecturing you.  Because that's not my intention.  I just have -- as a fellow human being, I just have such hope in the promise of what you could deliver.  It will spread far beyond the borders of Ukraine.
I used to wonder as a young senator when I first stood up on the Senate floor, and I’ve never been frightened of standing and speaking, I stood up and all of a sudden I realized that my desk is exactly where a senator, Daniel Webster, spoke from.  I mean this sincerely.  And for the first and only time in my career, I was seized with, my God, one of the great men in our history stood in this spot.  And I wondered what it’d have been like to be in that first Congress that gave us our freedom, created what I consider to be a great and decent nation.  Well, that's where you are.  It’s not hyperbole.  That's where each of you sit.  If you succeed, you will be the founders of the first truly free, democratic, united Ukraine.  An awesome responsibility, but what an incredible, incredible opportunity to serve your country. 
Thank you so much for this opportunity to speak to you today.  May God bless our two great nations and may God protect our troops.  (Applause.)
END                         
12:33 P.M. (Local)
*St. Michael’s
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 07, 2015
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko
The Bankova
Kyiv, Ukraine 
3:47 P.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO:  (In Ukrainian, no translation.)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. President, thank you very, very much.  Thank you for your hospitality.  It’s good to be back in Ukraine.  As you pointed out, it’s the fourth time since the Revolution of Dignity two years ago.  And I’m always overwhelmed by your warmth and your friendship and the way in which the Ukrainian people -- even folks on the street today -- how gracious and welcoming they are.
And I want to thank you, Petro, personally for your friendship you've shown to me and the leadership you've shown in taking steps to move Ukraine forward.
The events at the Maidan, the bravery and the determination of the Ukrainian people to reclaim their country and Ukraine’s journey over the past two years have been nothing short of inspiring.  And they’ve inspired not only me and my countrymen, but the world.  Particularly the over 1 million Ukrainian Americans -- the pride and expectation and hope that they have is palpable.  You should come see it and feel it.  It’s real.
Today, the President and I discussed the progress that Ukraine has made up to this point, the critical reforms that have been passed.  And we are starting to see real signs of economic progress, as the President referenced.  The GDP has started to increase, and industrial production is growing.  Agricultural exports are up.  And Ukraine’s currency has stabilized.  If we had said that two years ago with certainty, people would have looked at us like I’m not so sure that will happen.  But under your leadership, it has occurred.  
We have spoken about the vital importance of Ukraine following through on its IMF commitments.  We know from experience they're not easy.  These commitments are hard.  They require some very tough political decisions for not only you to make, Mr. President, but for all the members of the Rada.  These are not easy things to do to overcome the last 20, 30, 40 years of lack of an economic program of any consequence.  But it will continue to boost your economic progress, and we’ll continue to be your ally with the IMF.
And with the support from the United States, as was mentioned here, and thank you for mentioning it, Ukraine has set up a new patrol police to provide security in Kiev, Odessa, and Kharkiv.  And it is clear from the reports that we’ve gotten that it is palpable to the people on the street.  It makes a difference.  It’s that contact closest to the people, and it is felt.  And it radiates through I think -- presumptuous of me to say, Mr. President -- but it gives them hope of further reform, further progress.
In just a few weeks, Ukraine will finally see the implementation of the Trade Association Agreement with the European Union, the issue that first sent protesters and patriots to the Maidan in the first place.  But a lot of hard work as you -- the President and I discussed -- a lot of hard work remains, including reform of Ukraine’s law and justice sectors.
But the payoff will be worth it.  It will be genuinely worth it for Ukraine and all the Ukrainian people.  Economic benefits of this agreement for the Ukrainian people are substantial.  Ukraine is taking important steps in the right direction.  The President, the government, the Rada -- they’ve all worked hard.  And today President Poroshenko and I also spent a long time talking about how Ukraine must keep pushing ahead to realize the dreams of those who stood for months on the Maidan.
I just was visiting what I’d guess you’d refer to as memorial, a shrine, looking at the pictures of all of those 100 who were gunned down and killed -- ranged in age from in their early 20s to one person 82 years of age.  They came from all over.  They weren’t just folks from Kyiv.  And they gave the last ounce of everything they had to see the dreams of the Ukrainian people realized.
And as I have each of my visits, I’ve urged the President to continue to work very strongly with Ukraine’s democratic forces.  That's what the Ukrainian people expect, and that's what they deserve.  And that's how Ukraine is going to continue to move forward.  All Ukrainians, officials, business leaders, the business community, everyday citizens -- they’ve got to work together to root out corruption that has held this country back for so long.  
Mr. President, you and I have discussed this before.  The Ukrainian people cannot once again have their hopes dashed based on the cancer of corruption.  The Orange Revolution occurred and hopes were extremely high.  And here we are again because of the sacrifices made two years ago.  One more chance.  One more chance.
And it’s absolutely critical for Ukraine, in order to be stable and prosperous and part of a secure Europe to definitely, thoroughly, completely root out the cancer of corruption.  The people need to see that in ways -- that the ways of the past are permanently gone.  They no longer exist.
The means hard decisions.  That means ramping up the pace of reforms, avoidance of past practices, advancing good governance, increasing transparency across the board at every level of the government and strengthening the rule of law.  It means everyone playing by the same rules from the folks at the bottom, to the folks at the very top.
And as I told the President at our meeting, as long as you continue to make progress to fight corruption and build a future of opportunity for all Ukraine, the United States will stand with you.  We will stand with you.
We’ve already, as the President outlined, made significant financial commitments.  But we also have become your ally around the world making Ukraine’s case for an opportunity for a new day.  And today I’m announcing another $190 million -- almost $190 million in new assistance to support Ukraine’s progress.  It bring us to almost $760 million in direct support from the United States to Ukraine since the change in government in 2014; including more than $260 million in security assistance.
These new funds -- this additional roughly $190 million will help fight corruption in law enforcement and reform the justice sector.  It will attract more investment by streamlining regulations and privatizing state-owned enterprises in a transparent way, increasing Ukraine’s capacity for trade and improving access to capital for small- and medium-sized enterprises, improving energy security, advancing constitutional reform, and support of civil society and an independent media.
A strong civil society -- as I’ve said from my first visit to today, and I know the President agrees -- a strong civil society is critical to Ukraine’s future.  There is no democracy in the world that is a true democracy that does not have a strong, civil society.  One cannot exist without the other.
And before my meeting with President Poroshenko, I sat down with reformers, including activists from Ukrainian civil society, to discuss how the United States can be a strong partner with them, as well.
Of course, we also discussed the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.  The United States stands firmly with the people of Ukraine in the face of continued -- and I emphasize continued -- aggression from Russia and Russian-backed separatists.  And we continue to believe that the best way to end the conflict in Donbass is through a diplomatic framework that's laid out in the Minsk Agreement.  
But both sides need to hold up that bargain.  Minsk cannot succeed if Russia does not fulfill its commitments and if President Putin fails to live up to the promises he has repeatedly made to my President, to you, and to the international community.  
And President Obama very recently in meetings with President Putin has conveyed that message directly to President Putin that all of our international partners are expecting Putin to meet his obligations and commitments.  Moscow has to fully implement the Minsk Agreement and work constructively with Ukraine to create the conditions for free, fair, and safe local elections to occur in Donbass.  
And one more thing, let me be absolutely clear, the fact that we are not talking as much every single day about Crimea does not mean in any way we have forgotten that the illegal invasion -- and it’s an invasion -- by Russia of Crimea will not be accepted by us or the international community.  This attempted annexation is contrary to international law, is wrong, and we will not accept it under any circumstance.  And Moscow eventually has to end its occupation of Ukraine’s sovereign territory.  Crimea is still sovereign territory of Ukraine.
I’ll be speaking about these issues tomorrow in my address to the Rada, something I am very much looking forward to doing, Mr. President.  So I’ll end by saying thank you again, Mr. President.  Thank you for your warm welcome.  You have shown me, as well as your partnership with our country -- it is true I have only been here four times in two years.  But I think we may have logged close to a thousand hours on the telephone.  
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO:  Yes.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I think I tend to be in more direct conversation for longer periods of time with the President than with my wife.  (Laughter.)  I think they both regret that.  (Laughter.)   But it is important.  It is important.
We made good progress today, Mr. President.  But as you said, there is so much more to do.  Ukraine is on the cusp here.  Ukraine is on the cusp.  What happens in the next year is likely to determine the fate of this country for generations.  And the Heavenly Hundred went out there not for themselves, but for future generations.  It’s an overwhelming obligation that you have, Mr. President, that the government has, that the Rada has to step up and make sure that we talk about this period in our collective history books about that was the beginning of the end of what no one welcomed; and that you have a free, prosperous, democratic society because your people are so brave.  They have put so much into this.  They deserve no less.  And I know that is your obligation and objective, as well.  And we want to help in any way we can.  Thank you.  
END 
4:15 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 November 11, 2015
Remarks by The First Lady, Dr. Jill Biden and Captain Rolona Brown at the Joining Forces Veteran's Day Luncheon
United States Naval Observatory
Washington, D.C.
12:57 P.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Happy Veterans Day!  And we’re honored to welcome so many amazing women to the Vice President’s Residence.
 
I’d like to start by thanking A&E for everything that they have done to highlight women in the military community.  Some of you may have seen the documentary on Lifetime that premiered on Monday night.  Did you see it?  (Applause.)  Joe and I watched it; it was really amazing.  And I can’t think of a better way to start off Veterans Day than to shine a spotlight on all the different ways that women are connected to the military community —- whether they’re active duty or veterans, spouses, caregivers, mothers or wives. 
 
Their stories, like the stories of so many of you here today, show us how bravely you’ve met challenges that most Americans never have to face, or even imagine.  All of you are resourceful.  You can handle any situation.  You are some of the most dynamic women that our country has to offer.  (Applause.)  And your resilience and your grit should be celebrated.
 
It’s because of women like you and military families like yours that Michelle and I started Joining Forces in the first place.  And today, we want to thank all of you for your service.  We are honored to celebrate you, the incredible women we’ve had the opportunity to get to know and to see in action -- like Major Angela Nelson.  Where’s Angela?  Oh, Angela, hello!  (Applause.)  I met Angela in 2012 at a women's history day reception here at the Naval Observatory.  And Angela is with us here today.
 
And during a deployment to Iraq in 2007 and 2008, Angela served as one of the Marine Corps’ first Lionesses, a female servicemember specially trained to interact with Iraqi women.  The Lioness program was incredibly successful, and led to a broader effort to mobilize our female servicemembers called Female Engagement Teams, also known as FETS.  And I had the opportunity to see FETs train at Camp Pendleton.
 
Due to cultural restrictions -- and many of you may know this -- interacting with Afghan women is off limits to our male soldiers.  So when the FETs were deployed, they worked to build relationships with Afghan women, to gain their trust and better understand their needs, and to help bring them access to education and health care.
 
Most of the FETs I met were young women just like Angela, starting out on their lives.  But they were doing something that none of their male counterparts could do:  they were sharing their knowledge and education with women halfway around the world, in a country that -- where engagement was desperately needed.
  
Today, we’re also joined by the first two female soldiers to graduate from the Army Ranger School.  (Applause.)  So this is Captain Kristen Griest at my table, and Captain Shaye Haver.  So you women should stand up and be recognized.  (Applause.)  That gave me chills, so I know you have chills.  (Laughter.)   
MRS. OBAMA:  I know, I know!  (Laughter.)   
DR. BIDEN:  What an incredible accomplishment for anyone, man or woman.  Of the 400 soldiers who entered their class at Ranger School, only 96 completed one of the most challenging military training programs in the world.  Through it all —- every obstacle, every parachute jump, every sleepless night and exhausting trek through mountainous terrain —- Kristen and Shaye never quit.  They were determined to ensure future generations of women would have the same opportunity.
 
Another trailblazer with us today is Ricki Selva.  Ricki?  (Applause.)  She was in the first class of women at the United States Air Force Academy.  Like Kristen and Shaye, Ricki’s success paved the way for so many generations of women who wanted to attend a military academy.  Now, as a veteran and the spouse of the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Ricki has continued to serve our country through volunteer work and mentorship of military spouses.  Thank you, Ricki.  (Applause.)  
 
And finally, I would like to introduce a woman that you may have seen in the Lifetime documentary.  Rolona Brown enlisted in the Army when she was only 18 years old.  She served multiple deployments, the most difficult being her tour in Iraq.  She worried about her son and missing important events and milestones in his life.
 
But like many of you, Rolana persevered and prevailed as both a mother and a soldier.  Today she is a proud company commander of Echo Company, 266 Quartermaster Battalion at Fort Eustice -- (applause) -- and she is the beaming mother of a 19 year old who enrolled at Thomas Nelson Community College this fall.  Go, community colleges!  (Laughter and applause.)
 
Please join me in welcoming to the stage Rolona Brown.  Thank you, and God Bless our troops.
CAPTAIN BROWN:  Good afternoon.  My name is Captain Rolona Brown, and I’m honored to be a part of a program that recognizes veterans, women and families.  When Mary Robertson approached me about the Lifetime “Women of Honor” program, I had no idea how it would shape up.  I decided simply to tell my story.  Mary and her team did an amazing job, and I’m proud of the documentary.  (Applause.)  
My walk through military life has allowed me to wear many hats.  I’ve been a single soldier living in the barracks.  I’ve been an enlisted soldier.  I’ve been a spouse of a servicemember -- military, and a single mother.  It has allowed me amazing perspective on military life.  Each role gave me an opportunity to seek resources.  And in seeking those resources, I was able to stay resilient.  And resiliency is important.
That is why it brings me great joy to know that Mrs. Obama and Dr. Biden and Joining Forces initiative will provide families and veterans with wellness, education and employment resources.  Military families need opportunities to remain resilient after relocation, a deployment or a life-changing injury.  And I’m so thankful for the initiative.
The First Lady is truly an inspiration.  Her passion for community and families is evident in everything she’s done.  Mrs. Obama’s Let’s Move! campaign took on the challenge of childhood obesity, the public school lunch nutrition program, and the physical fitness of our youth.  She launched Reach Higher to inspire the youth to take charge of their future.
She is an inspiration to me.  Joining forces with Dr. Jill Biden, she’s an advocate for veterans and their families.  It is an honor and a privilege to introduce someone I admire and aspire to emulate -- the First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.  Thank you all.  Rest yourselves, rest yourselves.  Thank you, Rolona, for that amazing introduction.  I just keep saying that about you and Jenn and Kat -- you guys are amazing.  You all want to take that in?  It’s hard -- and it was interesting, as Jill introduced all of the servicemembers, the veterans, all of you responded the same way.  It’s like, oh, no, I don’t want to.  (Laughter.)  But you all are awesome.  And it is just an honor to be able to lift you up, and to shine a light on the great work you all are doing for this country.  So try not to be too bashful.  You’ve earned every accolade and more, so thank you.  (Applause.)   
It is a pleasure and an honor to be here this afternoon to celebrate Veterans Day.  I want to thank our hosts, the Vice President, that guy Joe over there -- (applause) -- as well as my dear friend Jill Biden, who let Joe come.  (Laughter and applause.)  It’s so funny to be behind the scenes with these great men who just sort of tiptoe around their wives.  (Laughter.)  It’s like, Joe, you coming to lunch?  He’s like, if Jill says I can.  (Laughter.)  He’s all walking around -- we’re like -- don’t touch anything!  It’s really wonderful.  (Laughter.)  I know, I know, that’s why you’re a great man.  (Laughter.)  
But you all are not just tireless advocates for veterans and military families, but you all, as the world knows, are dear friends of ours.  And this partnership, the partnership that we’ve built between our families is amazing.   And it wouldn’t happen without these two extraordinary people.  So I am thrilled to be here with them today.  I love you both.
I also want to recognize our many distinguished guests, including Secretary McDonald, who is here.  There you are.  (Applause.)  And as Jill mentioned, we want to thank A&E for honoring women who serve.  Thank you to the entire crew for A&E.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  
But most of all, we’re here for you all -- you all.  That’s why we do this stuff, because of you.  And I hope you feel special.  I hope every time we pull one of these luncheons together -- you come to the VP’s residence or the White House -- that you feel it.  We have so many incredible women with us today.  As Jill mentioned, we have servicemembers who are here.  We have military family members who are here.  We have caregivers who are here.  And we’re missing Kat, who is the third part of the trio.  She couldn’t be with us today, but we send our love to her.  
And of course, we have two of -- as I said, of the stars, Rolona and Jenn -- and hey to Kat.  You guys have -- you guys were incredible.  That piece -- that Lifetime piece was -- I was crying through the whole thing, and I knew what was going on.  (Laughter.)  And it was because of your stories, and the way that you just shared every last bit of your lives.  I mean, it’s truly going to change the way this country sees our military, our families, our veterans.  So thank you.  Thank you for being so brave and so open.  We are truly grateful.  (Applause.)  
But that thank you goes to all of you.  That’s why we’re here today -- to keep saying it.  Can’t say it enough:  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you for your service.  Thank you for your sacrifice.  And thank you for helping to break down barriers and raise the bar for our military across this country and, quite frankly, around the world.  Because the stuff that we’re doing is resonating around the world with leaders all across -- everyone is asking the question, how are we dealing with our military family members?  How are we dealing with our caregivers?  How are we dealing with our veterans?
But we also know that expressing our gratitude simply isn’t enough.  Words are never enough.  And that’s why Joining Forces is about action.  It’s about making real, concrete changes that you and your families can feel every day in your lives.  That what Jill and I have said. 
When we first met to talk about Joining Forces, we said, we don’t just want show, we want something that’s going to move the needle.  And that starts by ensuring that every single American understands what it means to be a woman in uniform or a member of a military family.  That’s why we’re so thrilled with the Lifetime piece -- because it shines a bright light on some of our women and what they do.  And we’re so grateful to these women for their courage, their willingness to tell their stories -- because their stories represent the stories of countless women all across this country.
They represent the stories of women who wear the uniform during the day, and then still find time to run the PTA meeting at night, to sew that Halloween costume, to go over homework -- everybody’s “amen.”  We can say it.  (Laughter.)  They represent the stories of women who care for our wounded warriors, and for their kids, and for their aging parents –- and they do it all at the same time.  And they’re the stories of women who endure those constant moves from base to base, those constant deployments, all while somehow managing to continue their careers and to keep their education first and foremost on their priority list.
But the truth is that so many folks in this country still don’t know these stories.  They still don’t know that we have over 2 million female veterans in our country, or that women are serving at some of the highest levels of our military as four-star generals and so many other leadership positions.  They don’t know.  And many folks still don’t know that countless military spouses and caregivers are serving and sacrificing without putting on a uniform.  We can’t identify you, but you’re out there getting it done.
That’s part of the reason why we started Joining Forces.  And over the past four years, Jill and I have seen that once we tell your stories; once we shine that light; once we say to people, look at this wonderful program, the “Women of Honor” -- once they see it and they learn about what you’re going through, they’re eager to honor and support all of you.  That’s the good news.  Once people know, they step up.  
And since we launched Joining Forces, we’ve seen folks step up in so many very important ways.  Governors and state legislatures across this country have stepped up and they’ve changed laws to make it easier for military spouses to get jobs when your families move from state to state.  Doctors and nurses, hospitals and medical organizations have stepped up to improve health care for you and your families.  Mayors have stepped up to work to end veterans’ homelessness in our cities -– and many of them -- some of them -- more to come -- they’ve already done it, and many are working on getting it done.  And since 2011, companies across America have stepped up by hiring or training more than 850,000 veterans and military spouses.  (Applause.)
So we are making progress, and we’re proud of what we’ve achieved through Joining Forces.  But I want to be very clear that we are nowhere near satisfied, and we are nowhere near finished.  Because as long as a single veteran in this country has no place to call home, or a single military spouse struggles to care for their family or continue their career, or a single military family can’t get the health care they need, then we still have work to do.  We still have work to do.
So we’re going to keep on working to ensure that you and your families get the jobs and the benefits you’ve earned, and the support and respect that you deserve.  That’s our vow to you on Veterans Day and every day, while we’re in the White House and long after we’re gone.  We’re going to be working on this issue.  Yes.  (Applause.)  Jill and I are proud of you.  Your Commander-in-Chief and your Vice President are proud of you.  And we are so grateful for everything that you have done and will continue to do for this country.  And we will never stop working to serve you as well as you have served this country.
So thank you again for your outstanding service.  And thank you for taking the time to spend Veterans Day here with us.
God Bless you all and your families.  God Bless America.  (Applause.)  
END 
12:20 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 October 28, 2015
Remarks by the First Lady, Dr. Biden, and His Royal Highness Prince Harry of the United Kingdom, At Invictus Games Event
Fort Belvoir Field House
Fort Belvoir, Virginia
12:43 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Good afternoon.  It's an honor to be here.  Let me start by thanking Colonel Mitchell and Command Sergeant Major Guillory for hosting us here at Fort Belvoir.  I would also like to thank everyone else for having us here today.  And a big thanks to the athletes and those who have played a big part in preparing for the 2016 Invictus Games.
For the past seven years, it’s been an honor to work with the First Lady, Michelle Obama, on a number of issues affecting our troops, our veterans and their families.  And the competitions our warrior-athletes participate in are some of our favorite events.  
One of the things that never ceases to amaze me -- even as I’ve seen it thousands of times -- is the spirit of our wounded warriors.  As they work toward their new normal after being injured, they never lose their competitive drive and dedication that made them some of the finest warriors this nation -- and the world -- has ever seen.
The Invictus Games offer a chance to compete against some of the finest athletes and warriors in the world, to carry their country’s flag in competition against other athletes who know as much about duty, loyal and sacrifice.
Last year, I had the privilege of leading the presidential delegation for the Invictus Games in London.  It was a thrill to cheer on our athletes -- often sitting beside our guest here, even though he was cheering for the other team.  (Laughter.)  But I have to admit, we both ended up cheering for all the athletes.  They were all so inspiring.  The games really showed the spirit of the military, their perseverance and their resilience.
Athletes like David Wiseman, who was shot during a 2009 firefight in Afghanistan.  The bullet that struck him is still lodged in his chest today.  In another display of teamwork and demonstrative of our close friendship with the United Kingdom, U.S. forces were able to assist with David’s evacuation.  At Invictus, not only did David compete and win big, but he helped Prince Harry organize the games because he knew what an incredible experience it would be for the competitors and their families.  And that’s what this is all about.
Prince Harry gets it.  Until recently, Prince Harry was active duty in the British Army Air Corps.  A veteran of two tours in Afghanistan, Harry has been a champion for veterans around the world.  He works closely with the Ministry of Defense to help make sure wounded service members in Britain have adequate recovery plans -- plans that include a vital focus on mental health.  He trekked with a team of wounded warriors from the U.S., U.K., and several Commonwealth countries to the South Pole, showing the world that there is nothing our warriors cannot do. 
And last year, Prince Harry launched the Invictus Games, where athletes do more than compete against one another -- they form lasting friendships with others who have served and sacrificed so much for all of us.  Warriors like Sergeant Stefan LeRoy, who was wounded by an IED in Afghanistan while carrying a wounded solider to a MEDEVAC helicopter.  A double amputee who only began running again a few months ago, Sergeant LeRoy has already run several races and hand-cycled even more.
And Army Specialist Sydney Davis, who will compete in shot-put, discus, basketball and volleyball; whose motto is, “NEVER stop training and practicing, and NEVER give up on yourself.”  As Prince Harry said when he launched the games, “Sports play a hugely important part in their recovery and their life beyond.”  
Now, I would like to introduce someone else who has been working tirelessly for military families -- someone who approaches everything she does with a sense of enthusiasm and vision, and always with a sense of fun.  I’m fortunate to have her as my great friend and my partner in Joining Forces, our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  
Thank you.  God bless our troops.  (Applause.)  
MRS. OBAMA:  Hey, you guys!  How’s everybody doing?  (Applause.)  It's okay to be excited.  This is exciting!  I'm excited.  (Laughter.)  
All right, ladies, Prince Harry is here.  Don't act you don't notice.  (Laughter.)  Come on, come on.
Well, I am thrilled to be here.  And I want to start by thanking Jill, who has been such a tremendous partner with me in our efforts around Joining Forces.  
I also want to thank Ken Fisher and his family for their outstanding leadership, for everything that they have done on behalf of military families.  I know that everybody here in this room knows about Fisher Houses, but for those who may not, these houses are truly a lifeline for tens of thousands of military family members every single year.   And I make it a point to visit families at Fisher Houses whenever I can, and I always walk away blown away by the amazing quality of care, the compassion of those who support our families.  So I want to make sure we all take this moment to give Ken and Tammy, their family, a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much. 
And more importantly, you guys, thank you for working to bring the Invictus Games to the United States.  This is truly and amazing, wonderful event full of fierce competition, incredible athleticism that we're going to see a little bit of here today, and truly inspiring stories.  So it’s no wonder that so many countries are getting behind it.  And I know that this year will be no exception. 
We are thrilled that this year’s games will be televised from ESPN’s Wide World of Sports Complex down in Disney World.  Yay, Disney!  (Laughter.)  Yes, it's okay, it's okay.  We're all excited about Disney.  (Applause.)  And I know that everyone involved is working to raise the bar so that this event will keep getting bigger and better every single year.  
And Jill and I, the President and the Vice President -- we’re going to do everything we can to shine a light on this event.  And this is just the beginning, because what we know is that we should be celebrating all of you, our wounded warriors, just like we celebrate our Olympians, our Paralympians and our other professional sports teams.  You all are amazing.  And we want to shine a light not just on you all as athletes, but on the folks who are behind the athletes every step of the way -- their caregivers and their families.  
Earlier today, I caught up with one of those tremendous caregivers who I’ve gotten to know over the years.  Her name is Melissa Meadows.  And her husband Jon sustained severe brain and nerve injuries in Afghanistan almost three years ago.  And his injuries were so serious that one of his doctors described him as an “advanced Alzheimer’s patient.”  
Melissa, like so many in this room, dropped everything.  She left her job as a nurse and cared for Jon full time, helping him in and out of bed, managing the family’s finances, managing Jon’s medication, all of his appointments, and so much more.  And while she was supporting her husband, Melissa started supporting other caregivers as well.  She helped organize a network to help other caregivers share information and ideas here at Fort Belvoir.  
That's one of the reasons why we're here today.  First of all, thank you all for all the tremendous work you do.  But Melissa started that support network here.  It was so successful that the Department of Defense is actually replicating their model at installations all around the world.  
And today, with Melissa’s support, her husband Jon continues to recover.  I got a chance to spend some time with them and saw his amazing art work -- another incredible therapy that is happening here at Fort Belvoir.
So it's just amazing to see.  It's been amazing to keep up with their story.  And as all of you can imagine, recovery, it’s a long road.  There are starts and stops.  There are good days and bad.  But Melissa, Jon, they are fighters, just like all of you.  Jon has made incredible progress.  And as I said, through the art therapy program with the USO and the Art League, he’s unlocked this amazing talent for sculpture and painting that he didn’t even know existed.  I actually commissioned him to do a piece for the President’s Christmas present from me, so please don't tell him.  (Laughter.)  Jon even has his own pop-up art exhibition in Alexandria.  
So whether it’s through the arts or through rugby, or cycling or basketball, we want the world to see these stories of grit and courage and grace.  These are the stories that our wounded warriors and their families are living out every single day, whether the cameras are around or not, whether we're here or not.  You guys are doing the work that makes us proud.
That’s what the Invictus Games and Joining Forces are all about.  They’re about sharing your stories with the world -- stories that we know up close, all three of us, because we get the honor of spending quality time with you and watching you up close.  But we want to rally folks across this country, quite frankly across the world, to honor and support men and women and families like you every single day, not just on days like this when the press is here, but every day.  
So I want to thank you all for everything you do.  I want to thank you for your service and your sacrifice.  I want to thank you for setting an example for all of us to live up to as human beings.  We could not be more proud of all of you.
And now, it is my pleasure to introduce our guest of honor.  Yeah.  (Laughter.)  He’s coming.  You may have heard of him before.  I’ve had the opportunity to spend some time with him over the years and I’ve seen his commitment and his passion to this issue, and I'll tell you, it's real.  He’s a real-life guy who cares about everyone in this room.  To him, our wounded warriors aren’t just a distant cause; to him, they’re brothers and sisters in arms.  They’re the men and women he’s served with. They’re the heroes he has a genuine personal connection with.  And he feels from the bottom of his heart that it is his job to serve them as well as they’ve served us.  
So I want to thank him for everything he’s done -- through the Invictus Games and so many other efforts.  And I guess I should also apologize to him in advance for all the gold medals that America will win in Orlando.  (Laughter and applause.)    
So without further ado, please welcome His Royal Highness, Prince Harry.  
PRINCE HARRY:  This is what happened in the opening of the Invictus Games -- your video came up and I got very emotional and then had to speak.  (Laughter.)  So you’ve done it to me again.
Right.  Hello, everyone, and thank you very much for all being here today.  On behalf of all veterans, I’d like to start by saying a big thank you to the First Lady and Dr. Biden.  Through Joining Forces, you have led the way in championing the welfare of service personnel and their families here in the U.S.  So thank you for everything that you have done.
I joined the Army in 2005.  It was a time when servicemen and women and their families, both in the U.S. and the U.K., we're making sacrifices for their countries that had not been experienced for generations.  In combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan, military personnel were setting examples for everyone about the values of service, duty, and dedication.  So, too, did their partners and children back home in the cities, towns and villages of our nations. 
I'm in no doubt that my two deployments to Afghanistan changed the direction of my life.  There is very little that can truly prepare for the reality of war.  The experiences can be stark and long-lasting.  
Returning to the U.K. after my first deployment, I shared the flight home with three critically injured British soldiers -- all in induced comas -- and the body of a Danish soldier killed in action.  It hit me then that this flight was one of many, carrying home men and women whose lives would be changed forever, and some who had made the ultimate sacrifice.  From that moment, I knew I had the responsibility to help all veterans who had made huge personal sacrifices for their countries to lead healthy and dignified lives after service.
In 2013, I visited the Warrior Games in Colorado.  I saw the power that sport could play in the recovery of both mind and body.  I thought that surely everyone, whether connected to the armed forces or not, would be inspired by their achievements.  So I left Colorado with a determination to broaden this to an international audience, and the idea for the Invictus Games was born.
Last year, at the first-ever Invictus Games, we saw over 400 competitors from 13 nations competing in the iconic venues of the London Olympics.  Audiences of tens of thousands turned out to show their support.  The games epitomized the very best of the human spirit -- men and women who had not only adjusted to life, but embraced it, proving that -- what can be achieved post-injury rather than focusing on what cannot.  
The Invictus Games seeks to change perceptions of physical and mental injury.  One thing we have to talk about more is breaking down these barriers around so-called invisible injuries like post-traumatic stress, just as we have for physical injuries like the loss of a limb.  This is a topic I know the First Lady and Dr. Biden are working hard to highlight so that people are no longer afraid to ask for help.  This fear of coming forward as a result of the stigma which surrounds mental health is one of the greatest challenges that veterans face today.
People from all walks of life struggle with issues like post-traumatic stress, anxiety and depression -- not just veterans.  We have to help them all to get the support that they need without fear of being judged or discriminated against.  Not only is it okay to talk about it, we have to talk about it.
I'm thrilled that the Invictus Games are happening again, obviously.  Hundreds of additional veterans from around the world will benefit from taking part, and millions more people will be inspired by their stories.  This really is going to be four incredible days of sport, I assure you.  
I hope that Invictus 2016 will remind people everywhere just how incredible our service personnel are and how much of a positive contribution to society they make.  I'm sure the American public will embrace the Invictus Games just as the British public did in 2014.  And I can't wait to see you all in Orlando.  You better bring it, U.S.A.  (Laughter.)  
Thank you.  (Applause.)  
END 
1:01 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 September 09, 2015
Remarks by the President and Dr. Jill Biden on Training America's Workers
Macomb Community College
Warren, Michigan
3:39 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Hi, everyone!
AUDIENCE:  Hi!
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you for that warm welcome.  I’m Jill Biden, and I’m proud to stand here today as a community college professor. (Applause.)  It's great to be in Michigan at such an innovative and collaborative school -- and one that is truly this community's college.  And it’s great to be with so many business leaders, philanthropists, and education advocates who understand the power of community colleges to change lives. 
Education is my life’s work.  I was back in the classroom just two weeks ago.  In fact, I was grading essays on the way here.  (Laughter.)  I’m sure all of the teachers -- who are your teachers?  Can you raise your hands?  (Applause.)  Nice to see you!  So, all you teachers know exactly what I mean.  So I want to give a special thank-you to all the teachers who are here today.  Thank you for what you do.  (Applause.)  
Every day in our classroom, we try our best to inspire our students -- but, really, it is ultimately they who inspire us. That’s why President Obama and I are here today -- because of the students.  We’re here because we believe in you.  We believe in what you’re doing, and we believe in what you can do. 
As a community college professor for over 20 years, I’ve seen the determination, resilience and dedication of countless students. 
Parents who are juggling jobs and child care while preparing for new careers; veterans who return to the classroom as they transition to civilian lives; and immigrants who overcome significant odds in hopes of achieving the American Dream.  Regardless of circumstances, they show up.  They work hard.  They believe anything is possible.  I’m so proud to be part of an administration that believes in them -- believes in you.  
From day one, we have made education a priority -- from investing in early childhood education to ensuring that more students graduate high school, to making college more affordable. But we’re not stopping there.  We’re helping community colleges, like Macomb to team up (mispronounces Macomb) -- Macomb -- sorry, Macomb.  Gosh!  (Laughter.)  You're correcting the teacher!  (Laughter.)  Like Macomb -- (applause) -- to team up with local employers and offer apprenticeship programs for new and returning students to learn the skills they need to move directly into good-paying jobs that already exist in their communities. 
My husband, Joe, the Vice President -- (applause) -- has traveled all across the country, talking about the importance of skills training in the 21st century.  Last week, he was in Florida visiting a community college, and yesterday he spoke at the first-ever White House Apprenticeship Summit.  Joe knows that skills-training programs like apprenticeships are vital to keeping our edge in the global economy, and they create pathways for people to grow in careers that they love. 
As Second Lady, I love visiting community colleges to see firsthand how they’re helping students become who they aspire to be -- nurses, IT specialists, and, of course, my favorite -- teachers. (Applause.) And I’m always impressed how community colleges use new technology to increase student success.  When I visited Austin Community College in Texas, I saw one of the nation’s largest learning labs -- it’s about the size of a football field, with more than 600 computers -- and I had the opportunity to meet with students who were taking an innovative developmental math course that customizes lessons for them to learn at their own pace.  
Students in that program are twice as likely to complete developmental math compared to a student enrolled in traditional ones -- mostly because it takes away their math anxiety.  I'm sure some of you might have a little of that. (Laughter.) One student told me she never considered herself a “math person” until taking this course.  Now, she wants to become a math teacher to help other students overcome their own struggles and find success. 
This is what community colleges are all about.  They have the flexibility to adapt and meet students’ needs.  If we want all Americans to succeed in the 21st century, we need to make sure that all students of all ages have the best education possible.  (Applause.)    
Our administration believes you should have the education and skills you need to succeed without being saddled with decades of debt.  (Applause.)  Because it’s too hard to get ahead when you start off from so far behind.  That’s why earlier this year, President Obama proposed America’s College Promise -- a common-sense idea to make two years of community college free for anyone who is willing to work for it -- to provide millions of responsible students with access to higher education and the opportunity of a more prosperous life.  (Applause.)    
All across our country, states and communities have been getting to work and implementing their own plans.  Nine million students a year could benefit.  It is the way to a better, smarter America.
To further support efforts to make two years of community college free, today President Obama is launching the College Promise Advisory Board -- which I’m proud to say that I will chair, and former 
Republican Wyoming Governor Jim Geringer will serve as the Vice Chair of the board.  Our task is to bring together leaders from across the country to highlight student success stories -- like we’ve 
seen in Tennessee, Chicago, and Michigan -- to share best practices, and to encourage others to join our efforts. 
So it’s important that you give your friends, your families, your classmates a heads-up -- to join the movement to make two years of community college free.  Because education is the key to America’s 
future.  (Applause.)  Joe and I, the First Lady and the President would not be where we are today without an education.  It’s what drives us every day to make sure that every student has the same opportunity. 
I’m truly honored to be here today with an incredible leader who recognizes the value of community colleges, and is investing in them so that they are the best that they can be. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the President of the United States -- Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
THE PRESIDENT:  Hello, Michigan!  (Applause.)  It’s good to be back at Macomb.  (Applause.)  Go, Monarchs!  
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  We love you!
THE PRESIDENT:  I love you back.  I do.  (Applause.)  
I want to begin by thanking your president, Jim Jacobs, for hosting us.  (Applause.)  We have got also two outstanding members of Congress here who support every single initiative that we’ve got here in the state of Michigan.  We got Sandy Levin and Brenda Lawrence.  (Applause.)  We’ve got your mayor, James Fouts here.  (Applause.)  Somebody was really excited about you, James.  (Laughter.)  And of course, we’ve got my favorite community college professor, Dr. Jill Biden here.  (Applause.)  Jill was not fibbing; on Air Force One, she was grading papers.  (Laughter.)  She was.  And I have flashbacks to when I was teaching law and grading papers.  It’s not as bad as writing papers -- (laughter) -- but reading them is tough too, sometimes.  
Jill works with Michelle to support our military families.  She’s leading the new College Promise Advisory Board.  On top of that, she teaches full-time at a community college in Virginia.  And her husband is not so bad either.  (Laughter.)  He’s okay.  Love Joe Biden.  (Applause.)    
So, across our country, young people -- and some just young-at-heart people -- (laughter) -- you’re young, you’re young -- are going back to school.  Just yesterday, Malia started her first day of senior year.  You know, I was sitting in her room because I was going to see her off her first day of school.  She puts her head on my shoulder and she says, “Daddy, you know, you realize this is probably going to be the last time that you ever send me off for my first day of school.”  
AUDIENCE:  Aww --
THE PRESIDENT:  And I started -- I had to look away.  I didn’t want to just be such a crybaby.  (Laughter.)  It makes no sense.  Michelle and I are way too young to have daughters who are both almost in college now.  So as a parent, I was a little freaked out. 
But as President, this time of year does inspire me, because students like the ones here are not just making the best investment in your future, but you’re also making the best possible investment in the country’s future.  If you put in the hard work to earn your education, then it’s up to all of us to make sure that hard work pays off.  And that’s something that I’m going to be focusing on over the next couple of weeks.  
You see, education has always been the secret sauce, the secret to America’s success.  More than 150 years ago, Abraham Lincoln helped establish land grant colleges all across America.  About 100 years ago, we started moving from an agrarian economy, a farm economy, to an industrial economy.  And we became the first country in the world to say that every child deserves a shot at a high school education, even if they weren’t born rich.  And it’s because we were ahead of the curve that we ended up having the most educated workforce.  And that was good for the entire economy and good for businesses.  
After World War II, we gave returning heroes like my grandfather the chance to go to college on the GI Bill.  And in those postwar years, the investments that we made in our future made us the best-educated nation on Earth.  That’s one of the reasons we built the world’s largest economy.  That’s the reason we built the biggest, strongest middle class.  And in places like Macomb County, you could feel secure, knowing that if you worked hard you’d have a chance to find a good job, buy a home, raise a family, send your kids to college.  We didn’t promise everybody that they’d get rich, but we promised that everybody who worked hard would have a chance to get ahead and have the dignity of a decent-paying job with decent-paying benefits.  That’s what it meant to be middle class.
Now, in more recent decades, the economy has begun to change again.  And other countries have caught up.  Good jobs, in some cases, went overseas.  And rather than redouble our efforts to make ourselves once again at the cutting edge and educate more and more of our young people, we decided to cut taxes for the very top.  We stopped investing as much as we needed to in higher education.  Tuition started going up because state legislators were providing less support.  Folks who were already doing extraordinarily well, they did even better, but prosperity didn’t trickle down to a middle class which was working harder than ever.  And then, finally, in 2008, a crisis spread all the way from Wall Street out to Main Street that cost millions of Americans their jobs, their homes, their savings -- everything that they had worked so hard to build all their lives. 
So we, together, have spent the last seven years fighting back, getting focused on middle-class economics once again.  Today, our businesses have created more than 13 million new jobs over the last five and a half years.  This is the longest streak of job creation on record -- (applause) -- 66 straight months of job creation.  So the unemployment rate is now at 5.1 percent, which is the lowest it’s been since April of 2008.  (Applause.)  Another 16 million Americans have the security of health insurance.  Our high school dropout rate is at an all-time low.  More Americans are graduating college than ever before.  (Applause.)  
And something that’s relevant to this area, because we refused to walk away from the American auto industry, our autoworkers -- (applause) -- our autoworkers, our automakers are on track to sell more cars and trucks this year than we have done in more than a decade.  (Applause.)  Workers right here in Michigan who thought they might never build a car again, they can’t build them fast enough now.  Chrysler has added more than 1,000 jobs at the truck plant right down the road.  (Applause.)  In May, GM announced plans to invest $1 billion at its Warren Tech Center, adding 2,600 new jobs.  (Applause.)  
So we placed our bets on American businesses and American workers, and that bet is paying off.  Michigan is coming back.  America is coming back.  (Applause.)  Detroit is coming back, too.  (Applause.)  I mean, I don’t know how the Lions are going to be this year, but I’m talking about the economy -- 
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Superbowl! 
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Bears!
THE PRESIDENT:  Okay.  The Bears, too, yeah.  (Laughter.)  Oh, uh-oh.  Watch it now.  I’ve got Secret Service.  (Laughter.)  
But, look, it’s not enough to get back to where we were.  It’s good that we’ve recovered, but for the sake of future generations, we’ve got to do better than that.  The biggest problem we have right now in today’s economy is that although we’re creating jobs, the unemployment rate is down, inequality is still creeping up.  A lot of times the jobs aren’t paying enough.  Wages are still flat.  
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  I know.
THE PRESIDENT:  I know.  (Laughter.)  Now, some of that has to do with the fact that companies that are making record profits just aren’t sharing enough of those profits with their workers.  (Applause.)  And that’s a problem.  And in some cases, our tax policies continue to incentivize jobs moving overseas.  
But a big part of making sure that today’s economy works better for ordinary folks goes back to what I started with -- this issue of education.  Every American willing to work hard should have a shot at a higher education.  Because as the economy globally becomes more competitive, everybody has got to upgrade their skills just a little bit.  It’s not enough just to have the same skills for 30 years, because what worked 30 years ago isn’t going to work now, and what works now is not going to work five years from now or 10 years from now, because everything is moving too fast.  And if you don’t have the skills to get the new jobs that pay better, if you don’t have the knowledge to adapt and be creative with new machinery, new systems, new techniques, you’re going to fall behind.  And then the wages for unskilled work will go down, and you’ll be trapped.
Compared to those with a high school diploma, college graduates earn about $1 million more over the course of their lifetimes.  That’s a lot of money, a million dollars.  Even today.  If you have a degree from a two-year college, you earn $10,000 a year more than somebody who only finished high school.  So one study found that over their lifetimes, workers who complete an on-the-job apprenticeship earn around $300,000 more than their peers who didn’t go through an apprenticeship program.  So whether it’s through a community college, an apprenticeship program, upgrading your skills pays off.  The unemployment rate for those folks are lower, and they’re going to earn more money over their lifetimes.  
By the end of the decade, two in three job openings will require some form of post-secondary education, some form of higher education.  Now, you don’t have to necessarily to go to a four-year college to get a good job, but you have to have some sort of specialized skill in order for you to advance.  It’s not enough just to be strong and willing to work.  It used to be you walked into an auto plant, and you said, look, I’m going to get to work on time.  I don't mind getting dirty.  I’m willing to work hard.  And that was enough.  It helped, by the way, that there were strong unions.  (Applause.)  And that's a whole -- I talked about that during Labor Day, by the way.  
Part of what gives workers more leverage to get higher pay when the company is making a lot of money is, is that they’ve got a union behind them.  (Applause.) 
But whether it is a bachelor’s degree, an associate’s degree, a journeyman’s card from an apprenticeship program, having a credential above and beyond your high school diploma, that's the surest ticket to the middle class.  And in global competition for jobs and industries, having the best-educated workforce in the world is the surest way for America to stay on top.  
So that’s why I believe no kid should be priced out of a college education.  (Applause.)  No hardworking young person should be denied a shot at success just because of where they started out in life.  You don't know -- that's the thing about America, where you start off doesn't determine where you're going to end up.  (Applause.)  I was the child of a single mom.  And we weren’t rich, and I turned out okay.  (Applause.)  But the reason -- the reason is I got an education.  Same thing with Michelle, same thing with Jill Biden, same thing with a lot of you.  
And that’s why, since I took office, we’ve increased Pell grants for low-income students by 70 percent.  (Applause.)  We’ve helped over 2 million more young people afford college.  We created a new college opportunity tax credit for working families, averaging about $1,800 a year.  With our new GI Bill for our veterans, our heroes coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan, we’ve helped more than 700,000 veterans and their family members earn a college education.  (Applause.)  
We took on a student-loan system that was letting big banks be the middlemen on student loans.  And so they were taking $10 billion -- tens of billions of dollars in unnecessary subsidies; we said we’ll cut out the middlemen, give the money directly to our students, the folks who need it. 
And back in 2009, when I had no gray hair -- (laughter) -- I had a little bit, but you couldn’t see it.  (Laughter.)  And now you can see it.  I still look good, though?  
AUDIENCE:  Yes!  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  I was fishing for that compliment.  (Laughter.)  
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Better now.
THE PRESIDENT:  Better?  Okay.  (Laughter.)  Where was I?  (Laughter.)  I got all flushed.  I was blushing a little bit.
Back in 2009, I came here and I announced my plan to invest in community colleges like this one.  And sometimes it can feel like four-year colleges get all the attention, but that has to change.  And I’ve tried to make sure that it changes.  I have been focused on community colleges.  They're at the heart of the American Dream.  Community colleges are everywhere.  They're accessible.  They're a gateway for folks who -- maybe their parents didn't go to college, maybe they can't afford a four-year college, maybe the career path they want to follow isn’t the traditional one.
This becomes the kind of place where you can earn the skills you need to start a great career right away.  It’s the kind of place where you don’t have to choose between pursuing an education and supporting a family -- you can do both because it’s flexible.  It gives folks who have to start working right away the chance to also get a skill or a degree.
It’s the kind of place where young people can save money before they start a four-year school.  They can transfer their credits -- a place where older workers can retool and retrain, take their careers to the next level.  
Over the last seven years, America has been graduating more students from community colleges than ever before.  But I’m not satisfied.  We can go further.  So in my State of the Union address, I announced my plan to bring down the cost of community college to zero.  Zero.  (Applause.)
For every young person willing to work hard, I want two years of college to be as free and universal as high school is today.  Back in the day, there were kids who got high school educations if they had a lot of money.  But the point was we realized, no, we want to make everybody educated.  That will be good for all of us.  And that's what we did.  Well, I want to do the same thing now for community college educations.
It’s easy for politicians to say that all of you are the future.  Every speech, right, is all you guys are the future.  But it’s not good enough just to say it.  You got to walk the walk, not just talk the talk.  (Applause.) 
So this is a concrete way -- a concrete way to reduce the costs of higher education for young people to improve the skills of workers so they get higher-paying jobs, to grow our economy.  It shouldn’t be controversial.
And I want to work with folks back in Washington, both Democrats and Republicans, to pass a responsible budget that invests in you.  If students and workers and businesses live up to their responsibilities, we should be able to make it easier for you to succeed.  
And by the way, in my original budget what I said was it does cost some money to make two years of community college free.  I said, well, the federal government will help states and counties and local communities, and we’ll pay for it by closing up some of these corporate tax loopholes that don't help grow the economy and aren’t fair anyway.  (Applause.) 
Now, unfortunately, so far at least, I’ve gotten a little resistance from members of Congress.  That will shock you.  (Laughter.)  But at a time when we should be growing our investments in job-training and apprenticeships, we’ve got Republicans in Congress who are going in the opposite direction.  Some are even talking about shutting down the government at the end of the month.  That’s what would happen if Congress fails to pass a budget.  It would be wildly irresponsible.  I mean, right now our economy is actually a bright spot in a pretty volatile world economy.  After all the hard work the American people have done to get us back on our feet, to recover from that Great Recession, now is not the time to play games.  You’d pull the rug right from under the economy.  But there’s a lot of talk about that in Washington for unrelated reasons that, by the way, don't even have to do with the budget.  They have to do with politics and presidential elections and posturing and all that good stuff.
Here’s the good news.  Investing in community colleges should be a cause that can get bipartisan support because both parties have supported it in the past.  Outside of Washington, away from Congress, people are stepping up.
So this fall, Tennessee is enrolling 15,000 students in its community college program.  Not one of them had to take out a loan to pay for tuition.  (Applause.)  Just in the last six months, six more states and communities have created new programs to provide free community college, including one in Milwaukee just announced today.  More than 10 others have introduced new legislation to get this done.  So there’s a movement going on here.  It’s an idea whose time has come:  Free community college for responsible students.  It’s an idea that makes sense.  
Now, to help more states adopt that idea, as Jill mentioned, we’re announcing a new, independent College Promise Advisory Board.  It’s going to be led by two outstanding leaders -- Dr. Jill Biden and former Republican Governor Jim Geringer.  And they’re going to work with businesses and charities and colleges and labor groups and nonprofits to make sure every young person who works hard has a shot at a great education.
And if you want more information -- because we're going to need grassroots support for this idea -- we want you to go to the website, HeadsUpAmerica.us -- HeadsUpAmerica.us.  And we call it Heads Up America because we're giving folks a heads-up.  If you want a great shot at a good-paying job, then community college might be the right path for you.  And if you work hard, then community college should be free.  
Of course, we don’t just want every student to be able to attend community college, we want them to attend a great community college.  And that’s the other reason I came back to Macomb.  (Applause.) 
This is one of the best, most innovative community colleges in the country.  (Applause.)  Under your president’s leadership, you work directly with local employers and labor unions to make sure students are getting the skills that they need to get a job right now.  You help students find support for their housing and childcare so that it’s easier to stay in school.  Your early-college programs gives high school students the chance to take college courses and earn credits towards a degree.  (Applause.) 
Whenever you can, you help students get out of the classroom and get hands-on training for jobs that need to be filled right now.  You’re learning tech skills, advanced manufacturing skills.  And instead of taking on more debt for this training, a lot of you are already drawing a paycheck.  That's the kind of education you want.
So we want to give workers across America the same chance that you have to get real-world experience that leads directly to a good job.  The average starting wage for a worker who’s finished an apprenticeship is now more than $50,000 a year.  And, by the way, our competitors understand how important these programs are to their economies.  On a per-capita basis, England has 15 times as many apprentices as we do.  Germany has 16 times as many.  So that’s giving them a leg up when it comes to filling jobs of the future.  
Now, if England and Germany can do it -- (laughter) -- I mean, listen, I love the English and the Germans.  I’m just saying, this isn’t that hard.  It’s not rocket science.  It requires some political will.  So today we’re taking action to change that.  
My administration has already made the largest investment in apprenticeships in nearly a decade.  We’re going to build on that momentum with $175 million in grants to 46 apprenticeship programs all across the country.  (Applause.)  And here at home, together with Grand Rapids Community College, Macomb is going to work with partners across the region to give you more opportunities to “earn as you learn.”  Just down the road, Focus: HOPE -- (applause) -- is going to help folks living in Detroit earn new jobs, or get better-paying jobs.  
Across America, companies like Northrup Grumman and Rolls Royce will help prepare workers for jobs in advanced manufacturing.  You’ve got companies like Cisco that are helping them to prepare for jobs in IT.  Companies like Pfizer will help prepare them for jobs in health care.  Unions like the UAW and the AFL-CIO are going to help workers earn new jobs or better-paying ones.  
So this is something everybody can get behind.  When our businesses are creating good jobs, and our community colleges and training programs are helping workers get the skills they need to fill those jobs, you can’t stop us.  There’s nothing we can’t accomplish.  
You know, just over 30 years ago, as part of his reelection campaign, President Ronald Reagan came right here to Macomb Community College.  Here’s what he told the young people in the field house that day.  “Our duty,” he said, “is to make sure that you have the same America of opportunity and hope and dreams and future that we had when we were your age.”  Now, Ronald Reagan and I belonged to two different parties.  We had a different vision about how our economy could grow.  But I agree with those words.  In America, it should not matter who you are or where you come from, what your last name is, who you love.  Everybody deserves a chance to make it.  Everybody deserves “opportunity and hope and dreams and future.”  (Applause.)  
And today, with a record streak of job growth, an auto industry that’s back on its feet, and wages that are starting to finally rise a little bit, I’ve never been more optimistic about America.  We are not there yet.  We’ve got more work to do.  But if we just keep on building on the progress that we’ve already made, if we keep restoring the link between hard work and success, then we won’t just recover from that recession that we had, we’re not just going to retrain a workforce, we’re going to renew our nation’s promise.  We’re going to rebuild our middle class.  We’ll remind the world why it is that America is the greatest country on Earth.
Thank you, Michigan.  God bless you.  God bless America.  (Applause.)  
END 
4:16 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 June 06, 2015
Remarks by the President in Eulogy in Honor of Beau Biden
12:08 P.M. EDT
  THE PRESIDENT:  “A man,” wrote an Irish poet, “is original when he speaks the truth that has always been known to all good men.”  Beau Biden was an original.  He was a good man.  A man of character.  A man who loved deeply, and was loved in return.
  Your Eminences, your Excellencies, General Odierno, distinguished guests; to Hallie, Natalie and Hunter; to Hunter, Kathleen, Ashley, Howard; the rest of Beau’s beautiful family, friends, colleagues; to Jill and to Joe -- we are here to grieve with you, but more importantly, we are here because we love you.
  Without love, life can be cold and it can be cruel.  Sometimes cruelty is deliberate –- the action of bullies or bigots, or the inaction of those indifferent to another’s pain.  But often, cruelty is simply born of life, a matter of fate or God’s will, beyond our mortal powers to comprehend.  To suffer such faceless, seemingly random cruelty can harden the softest hearts, or shrink the sturdiest.  It can make one mean, or bitter, or full of self-pity.  Or, to paraphrase an old proverb, it can make you beg for a lighter burden. 
  But if you’re strong enough, it can also make you ask God for broader shoulders; shoulders broad enough to bear not only your own burdens, but the burdens of others; shoulders broad enough to shield those who need shelter the most.
  To know Beau Biden is to know which choice he made in his life.  To know Joe and the rest of the Biden family is to understand why Beau lived the life he did.  For Beau, a cruel twist of fate came early –- the car accident that took his mom and his sister, and confined Beau and Hunter, then still toddlers, to hospital beds at Christmastime.
  But Beau was a Biden.  And he learned early the Biden family rule:  If you have to ask for help, it’s too late.  It meant you were never alone; you don’t even have to ask, because someone is always there for you when you need them. 
  And so, after the accident, Aunt Valerie rushed in to care for the boys, and remained to help raise them.  Joe continued public service, but shunned the parlor games of Washington, choosing instead the daily commute home, maintained for decades, that would let him meet his most cherished duty -– to see his kids off to school, to kiss them at night, to let them know that the world was stable and that there was firm ground under their feet. 
  As Joe himself confessed to me, he did not just do this because the kids needed him.  He did it because he needed those kids.  And somehow, Beau sensed that -– how understandably and deeply hurt his family and his father was.  And so, rather than use his childhood trauma as justification for a life of self-pity or self-centeredness, that very young boy made a very grown-up decision:  He would live a life of meaning.  He would live a life for others.  He would ask God for broader shoulders.
  Beau would guide and look out for his younger brother.  He would embrace his new mom –- apparently, the two boys sheepishly asking their father when they could all marry Jill -– and throughout his life, no one would make Jill laugh harder.  He would look after their baby sister, Ashley.  He would forever be the one to do the right thing, careful not to give his family or his friends cause for concern.
  It’s no secret that a lot of what made Beau the way he was was just how much he loved and admired his dad.  He studied law, like his dad, even choosing the same law school.  He chased public service, like his dad, believing it to be a noble and important pursuit.  From his dad, he learned how to get back up when life knocked him down.  He learned that he was no higher than anybody else, and no lower than anybody else –- something Joe got from his mom, by the way.  And he learned how to make everybody else feel like we matter, because his dad taught him that everybody matters. 
  He even looked and sounded like Joe, although I think Joe would be first to acknowledge that Beau was an upgrade -- Joe 2.0.  (Laughter.)  But as much as Beau reminded folks of Joe, he was very much his own man.  He was an original. 
  Here was a scion of an incredible family who brushed away the possibility of privilege for the harder, better reward of earning his own way.  Here was a soldier who dodged glory, and exuded true humility.  A prosecutor who defended the defenseless.  The rare politician who collected more fans than foes, and the rarer public figure who prioritized his private life above all else.
  Beau didn’t cut corners.  He turned down an appointment to be Delaware’s attorney general so he could win it fair and square.  When the field was clear for him to run for the Senate, he chose to finish his job as A.G. instead.  He didn’t do these things to gain favor with a cynical public –- it’s just who he was.  In his twenties, he and a friend were stopped for speeding outside Scranton.  And the officer recognized the name on the license, and because he was a fan of Joe’s work with law enforcement he wanted to let Beau off with a warning.  But Beau made him write that ticket.  Beau didn’t trade on his name.
  After 9/11, he joined the National Guard.  He felt it was his obligation -– part of what those broader shoulders are for.  He did his duty to his country and deployed to Iraq, and General Odierno eloquently spoke to Major Biden’s service.  What I can tell you is when he was loading up to ship out at Dover, there was a lot of press that wanted to interview him.  Beau refused.  He was just another soldier. 
  I saw him when I visited Iraq; he conducted himself the same way.  His deployment was hard on Hallie and the kids, like it was for so many families over the last 14 years.  It was hard on Joe, hard on Jill.  That’s partly why Jill threw herself into her work with military families with so much intensity.  That’s how you know when Joe thunders “may God protect our troops” in every speech he does, he means it so deeply.
  Like his father, Beau did not have a mean bone in his body.  The cruelty he’d endured in his life didn’t make him hard, it made him compassionate, empathetic.  But it did make him abhor bullies. 
  Beau’s grandfather, Joe’s father, believed that the most egregious sin was to abuse your power to inflict pain on another.  So Beau squared his broad shoulders to protect people from that kind of abuse.  He fought for homeowners who were cheated, seniors who were scammed.  He even went after bullying itself.  He set up a Child Protector -- Predator Task Force, convicted more than 200 of those who targeted vulnerable children.  And in all this, he did it in a way that was alive to the suffering of others, bringing in experts to help spare both the children and their parents further trauma.
  That’s who Beau was.  Someone who cared.  Someone who charmed you, and disarmed you, and put you at ease.  When he’d have to attend a fancy fundraiser with people who took themselves way too seriously, he’d walk over to you and whisper something wildly inappropriate in your ear.  (Laughter.)  The son of a senator, a Major in the Army, the most popular elected official in Delaware –- I’m sorry, Joe –- (laughter) -- but he was not above dancing in nothing but a sombrero and shorts at Thanksgiving if it would shake loose a laugh from the people he loved.  And through it all, he was the consummate public servant, a notebook in his back pocket at all times so he could write down the problems of everyone he met and go back to the office to get them fixed.
  Because he was a Biden, the titles that come with family -– husband, father, son, brother, uncle -– those were the ones Beau valued above any other.  This was a man who, at the Democratic National Convention, didn’t spend all his time in backrooms with donors or glad-handing.  Instead, he rode the escalators in the arena with his son, up and down, up and down, again and again, knowing, just like Joe had learned, what ultimately mattered in life.
  You know, anyone can make a name for themselves in this reality TV age, especially in today’s politics.  If you’re loud enough or controversial enough, you can get some attention.  But to make that name mean something, to have it associated with dignity and integrity –- that is rare.  There’s no shortcut to get it.  It’s not something you can buy.  But if you do right by your children, maybe you can pass it on.  And what greater inheritance is there?  What greater inheritance than to be part of a family that passes on the values of what it means to be a great parent; that passes on the values of what it means to be a true citizen; that passes on the values of what it means to give back, fully and freely, without expecting anything in return?
  That’s what our country was built on –- men like Beau.  That’s who built it –- families like this.  We don’t have kings or queens or lords.  We don’t have to be born into money to have an impact.  We don’t have to step on one another to be successful.  We have this remarkable privilege of being able to earn what we get out of life, with the knowledge that we are no higher than anybody else, or lower than anybody else.  We know this not just because it is in our founding documents, but because families like the Bidens have made it so, because people like Beau have made it so. 
  He did in 46 years what most of us couldn’t do in 146.  He left nothing in the tank.  He was a man who led a life where the means were as important as the ends.  And the example he set made you want to be a better dad, or a better son, or a better brother or sister, better at your job, the better soldier.  He made you want to be a better person.  Isn’t that finally the measure of a man -– the way he lives, how he treats others, no matter what life may throw at him?
  We do not know how long we’ve got here.  We don’t know when fate will intervene.  We cannot discern God’s plan.  What we do know is that with every minute that we’ve got, we can live our lives in a way that takes nothing for granted.  We can love deeply.  We can help people who need help.  We can teach our children what matters, and pass on empathy and compassion and selflessness.  We can teach them to have broad shoulders.
  To the Biden family, this sprawling, intimate clan –- I know that Beau’s passing has left a gaping void in the world.  Hallie, I can only imagine the burdens that you’ve been carrying on your shoulders these past couple of years.  And it’s because you gave him everything that he could give everything to us.  And just as you were there for him, we’ll be there for you.
  To Natalie and Hunter –- there aren’t words big enough to describe how much your dad loved you, how much he loved your mom.  But I will tell you what, Michelle and I and Sasha and Malia, we’ve become part of the Biden clan.  We’re honorary members now.  And the Biden family rule applies.  We’re always here for you, we always will be -- my word as a Biden.  (Laughter.) 
  To Joe and Jill –- just like everybody else here, Michelle and I thank God you are in our lives.  Taking this ride with you is one of the great pleasures of our lives.  Joe, you are my brother.  And I’m grateful every day that you’ve got such a big heart, and a big soul, and those broad shoulders.  I couldn’t admire you more. 
  I got to know Joe’s mom, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden, before she passed away.  She was on stage with us when we were first elected.  And I know she told Joe once that out of everything bad that happens to you, something good will come if you look hard enough.  And I suppose she was channeling that same Irish poet with whom I began today, Patrick Kavanagh, when he wrote, “And I said, let grief be a fallen leaf at the dawning of the day.”
  As hard as it is right now, through all the heartache and through all the tears, it is our obligation to Beau to think not about what was and what might have been, but instead to think about what is, because of him.  Think about the day that dawns for children who are safer because of Beau, whose lives are fuller, because of him.  Think about the day that dawns for parents who rest easier, and families who are freer, because of him.  Some folks may never know that their lives are better because of Beau Biden.  But that’s okay.  Certainly for Beau, acclaim was never the point of public service. 
  But the lines of well-wishers who’ve been here all week -- they know.  The White House mailroom that’s been overflowing with letters from people -- those folks know.  The soldiers who served with Beau, who joined the National Guard because of him.  The workers at Verdi’s who still have their home because of him, and who thanked him for helping them bus tables one busy night.  The students in Newark who remember the time he talked with them for hours, inexhaustible, even after giving a speech, even after taking his National Guard fitness test.  The Rehoboth woman who’s saved a kind voicemail from him for five years, and wrote to say “I loved the way he loved his family.”  And the stranger who wrote from halfway across this great country just to say, “The only thing we can hope for is that our children make us proud by making a difference in the world.  Beau has done that and then some.  The world noticed.”
  Jill, Joe, Hallie, Hunter and Natalie -- the world noticed.  They noticed.  They felt it, his presence.  And Beau lives on in the lives of others.  And isn’t that the whole point of our time here?  To make this country we love fairer and more just, not just for Natalie and Hunter, or Naomi, or Finnegan, or Maisy, or Malia, or Sasha, but for every child?  Isn’t that what this amazing journey we’ve been on is all about -– to make life better for the next generation? 
  Beau figured that out so early in life.  What an inheritance Beau left us.  What an example he set.
  “Through our great good fortune, in our youth our hearts were touched with fire,” said Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.  “But, above all, we have learned that whether a man accepts from Fortune her spade, and will look downward and dig, or from Aspiration her axe and cord, and will scale the ice, the one and only success which it is his to command is to bring to his work a mighty heart.”
  Beau Biden brought to his work a mighty heart.  He brought to his family a mighty heart.  What a good man.  What an original. 
  May God bless his memory, and the lives of all he touched.
                          END                12:32 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 14, 2015
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at Central Piedmont Community College Commencement Address
AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY
Charlotte, North Carolina
Good afternoon everyone!
Teachers, families, graduates: I am so honored to be back in Charlotte for such an important day.  Graduating from college is an extraordinary achievement, and I would like to congratulate all of you.  Each of you had a hand in the success of these incredible graduates.  Congratulations – you did it!
I’d also like to give a special thanks to President Zeiss for inviting me to join all of you.  Last summer, I had the pleasure of traveling to Switzerland for an international conference on workforce training, where I first met President Zeiss.  Ever since, he’s been encouraging me to visit your beautiful school, and I am so pleased to finally be in Charlotte with you.
Central Piedmont Community College is among the best of the best.  This school is one of the leading institutions of higher education that is adapting to the needs of our modern workforce.  Central Piedmont is equipping students with the skills they need to excel in careers in some of the fastest growing industries in the United States, like manufacturing, engineering and health care.
By partnering with local businesses, you are answering the call of our nation, to provide a well-equipped and well-trained workforce.  And the best-educated workforce too—for many of today’s graduates will continue their education at a four-year university to earn a Bachelor’s, Master’s or a PhD. 
Charlotte is one of the fastest growing cities in the country—and Central Piedmont has been a reflection of that growth.  You are truly the community’s college.  And, I am not the only one who loves being at a community college.
A few days ago, President Obama delivered a commencement speech at a community college in South Dakota.  He and my husband Joe understand what we all understand—community colleges are America’s best-kept secret, and it is time to let the secret out.  That’s why our administration wants to make two years of community college free—to provide millions of responsible students a pathway to new jobs and higher education. 
But I am not a politician.  I am an English professor.  I feel at home here because I have taught in community colleges for more than 20 years, and I still teach full-time at a community college outside of Washington, DC.  Teaching is not just what I do; it’s who I am.
At the end of one semester, a student of mine said she had seen me on TV with First Lady Michelle Obama.  My student said to her mother, “Mom! Mom!  That’s my English teacher!”  And her mother said, “That’s not your teacher, that’s the Second Lady.”  Most of my students don’t know I have two jobs.  But they do know that my first priority is to them.
I’m relieved to have completed another successful year; sad to see my students leave, but enormously proud of what they have accomplished.  And I know many of the teachers here today feel the same way.  So, I’d like to give a special congratulations to all the faculty and staff—teaching with no assistants, responding to emails in the middle of the night, grading papers on the weekends and holidays, getting excited about "summer break" only to begin thinking about your syllabi for next semester.
Working at a community college is a huge honor—and the best motivation is the students we celebrate today—and their families who support them.  To the parents and grandparents, spouses and partners, children and grandchildren, I know how deeply moving this day is for you.  I remember when my kids graduated from college—each nervous but full of potential, more prepared for their life’s work.  This is truly a special moment, and it simply could not have happened without your love and support.
And, of course, I’d like to congratulate the students.  You should be so proud of the hard work you have completed, the relationships you have built, and the enormous honor you are about to receive.
I’d like to take a moment to thank the student veterans who are graduating today.  As a lifelong educator and a military mom, I am always inspired by your strength, resilience, and pride.  I know you have the skills, discipline, and leadership to succeed in anything you put your mind to.  You are among the best our nation has to offer.  Thank you for your service to our country.
Now, most commencement speakers give graduates advice on what to expect when they leave this place and enter the real world.  But, like my students, most of you already live in the real world.
You are students like Kelley Creed—a single mother of two who moved across the country and enrolled at Central Piedmont to provide a better life for her children.  After graduation, Kelley plans to transfer to the University of North Carolina, Charlotte to get her bachelor’s degree in respiratory therapy.
You are students like Jaimz Andrews—a single father to a four-year old daughter, and an Air Force veteran who returned to the classroom to complete his education and re-tool his training for a civilian career.  Jaimz was accepted to Central Piedmont’s Cardiovascular Tech program so he’ll be back here for another degree.
You are students like Elizabeth Burgos—who won two music scholarships and has been able to live out her passion playing the piano thanks to this community college.  Elizabeth was accepted into three four-year schools and plans on attending Winthrop University next year and eventually go on to become a teacher.
Like Kelley, Jaimz and Elizabeth, as I work hard every day to inspire my students, it is ultimately they who inspire me.  My students teach me so many lessons of life, more than any lesson I could teach in the classroom—and I would like to share a few of those with you today.
The first of which is to seize opportunity. 
In my classroom, I have students from all over the world—from Poland, Senegal and Taiwan—who left behind their families, their friends and everything that was familiar to them, to get their education in the United States.  Many of them had to overcome so many obstacles in life—tragedy and heart breaking loss—but who are now turning the page on their past and creating a brighter future for themselves and their families.
Remember that the education you received here is so much bigger than the diploma.  It is the confidence to know that you can succeed, even when you face the most difficult, knotted problems.  It is the courage to take a leap of faith into a new career, move to a new city to pursue your dream, or ask for the promotion you know that you deserve.
The second lesson is to be charitable.
A former student at the community college where I teach was one of the lost boys of the Sudan.  During his time at my school, he collected bicycles to send back to his war-torn village, which had been devastated by a Civil War.  Because he knew that even one bike could benefit a whole family and help to change the welfare of his entire community.
So show kindness to others with your time, but most of all with your heart. As college graduates, it is now your responsibility to use your knowledge to lift up others.  As you become successful, pass that good fortune along to those around you.
Third, remember to always, always, be yourself.
One student of mine—an 83-year-old man from Korea—took my class to help improve his English.  Can you imagine being 83 and back in the classroom!  The other students were so nice to him and always helped him out, especially with technology.  For him, he simply loved being in class to better learn a second language.
So, you too can work to identify your greatest passions, the things that captivate and animate you, and strive to match them to the needs of the world around you.
Community colleges are a gateway—a gateway to a new career, to a four-year university and to a more prosperous life.  CEO’s of Fortune 500 companies, star athletes, and public officials have all walked through the doors of a community college.  They started their careers here just like you.
Take for example one of your very own Central Piedmont graduates.  Crystal Carson, who is here with me today, earned her associate’s degree from Central Piedmont in 2011, and now she works for the President of the United States.  Crystal serves as the Assistant to the White House Director and Deputy Director of Communications, and her desk is just down the hallway from the Oval Office.
When I asked Crystal if there was one piece of advice or wisdom that she could share with all of you today, Crystal said, and I quote, “Never quit.  If you believe in yourself, anything is possible.  When presented with opportunity, just say yes and figure out the details later.”
Crystal works alongside Deesha Dyer, who went to a community college in my hometown of Philadelphia, and now works for the President and First Lady as the White House Social Secretary.  Deesha is responsible for hosting hundreds of events that open the doors of the White House, for the world to see our character and vibrancy—from the annual Fourth of July festivities on the South Lawn to State Dinners with foreign leaders.  As Joe would say, her job is a big deal.
The new U.S. Chief Data Scientist, DJ Patil, also went to a community college.  DJ is responsible for helping us use technology to improve the way government works for the American people. 
Finally, take to heart the words of one of my favorite actors, Tom Hanks, who credits his community college experience with his success in life.  As he put it, and I quote, “That place made me what I am today.”
The degree you have earned here will help you build the life you want to live.  So today, reflect on how far you have come.  And know that if you dream big and work hard, there is no limit to how far you can go.  Wherever your path takes you, I hope you will seize opportunity, be charitable, and always, always be yourself.
Cherish this moment, and celebrate your hard-earned achievement with your friends and family.
On behalf of President Obama, the First Lady and the Vice President, my husband Joe—we are so proud of you.
Congratulations, graduates!
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 08, 2015
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Mother's Day Tea for Military Spouses
State Dining Room
3:50 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  So good afternoon, everyone.  It’s wonderful to welcome you here to the White House.  Many of you know that I’m a proud Blue Star mom, and I’m always honored to be in the presence of military families.
My son Beau is a major in the Delaware Army National Guard.  And when he deployed to Iraq for a year, it was pretty tough on our family, like I’m sure many of you know.  And as a grandmother of military-connected children, I know firsthand that no matter how resilient our military families are, they confront challenges that most Americans never have to face.  They send loved ones into harm’s way; endure countless separations during training.  They start over on different bases, in different towns, again and again.  And it can really be hard.
I know many of you in this room have faced similar challenges.  And I want you to know just how much we appreciate everything your families do in serving our country.  We ask a lot of our military families, and I believe that each of us -- no matter where we live, no matter whether we’re connected to military ourselves -- all of us should make our best efforts to show our military spouses, kids, siblings and parents how much we appreciate their service and their sacrifice.
That is why First Lady Michelle Obama and I started Joining Forces four years ago -- to unite non-profits, schools, foundations, businesses, associations, and Americans of every stripe around this initiative to support these families.  And we’re working with Americans all across the country, in every sector of society, to show our support. 
And Mother’s Day gives us a special opportunity to say thanks to the mothers who have shaped and supported us.  So for Mother’s Day we wanted to simply say thank you to all the mothers who have loved and supported us.  Thank you for all that you do for your selflessness and for your sacrifice on behalf of this country. 
And now it is my honor to introduce our country’s great supporter of military moms and families, my friend and partner, First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  I thought that was a “yay!”  (Laughter.)  but it was a “no!”  (Laughter.)  No more.  Give her back the phone.  (Laughter.)  Why did you take the phone from her?  (Laughter.) 
Well, Happy Mother’s Day.  Wow!  First of all, you all look so beautiful.  You really did it up for us today.  (Laughter.)  Looking good!  I hope you all get a shot of all these beautiful colors and all the young people here.  You guys look so beautiful and mature -- and handsome.  Because we have some proud young men here, too, who are holding it down.  (Laughter.)   
So I want to start by thanking Jill for that very kind introduction, but she’s just an amazing partner and she’s somebody that I look up to, because she handles a lot.  She is a mom, a grandma.  She’s teaching every day, and then she does these duties.  Nobody knows, really, how much you're -- we're on the plane, she’s grading papers.  (Laughter.)  We're in a hold, she’s grading papers.  (Laughter.)  We cheer when grading paper time is over because she’s done!  (Laughter.)  And then when she’s through grading papers, then she travels.  And she does it with grace and beauty, and she is an example of the kind of moms that you all are.
And I tell you all, thank you so much, because -- you thank us, but we are just a reflection of you.  We just happen to be on TV.  But you all are the ones on the ground.  So, most of all, I want to thank everybody who’s here.  We've got active duty servicemembers here.  We’ve got Gold Star and Blue Star moms here with us today.  We have caregivers of our wounded warriors, a community that often gets overlooked, but that is a community that needs our support and needs to be lifted up as much, if not more, than all of us.  And we’ve got our veterans and our military spouses here, too. 
And today is National Military Spouse Appreciation Day.  (Applause.)  Yes, high fives all around.  (Laughter.)  We couldn't have picked a better day to show you how much we care and how grateful we are for the service that you provide for our country.  
Wonderful folks here like Mary Winnefeld.  I didn’t see Mary.  There you are.  You weren't in the receiving line.  Okay. That's Mary.  Mary has been such a tremendous friend and an ally to me and Jill and Joining Forces.  And for so long, she’s been a forceful advocate for her fellow military spouses and Blue Star moms, especially the caregivers of our wounded warriors.  And she’s a hoot, too.  (Laughter.)  She’s a lot of fun.  So I want to make sure we recognize Mary.   
I think we also have Deanie -- did I miss Deanie?  Deanie was going to be here.  We wanted to recognize Deanie Dempsey, who’s been a leader and a supporter to Jill and I as well.
And you might not know that later this year, Admiral Winnefeld and General Dempsey are going to be retiring from active duty.  High fives.  Transitioning.  Transitioning.  (Laughter.)  That's right, not retiring, because there’s always work.  But before they go, we wanted to thank Mary and Deanie for their many years of tireless work on behalf of military families. We know they’re not done.  Mary doesn’t stop.  This is a transition.  We're grateful to you and we just want to -- (applause.)
You're not done with us yet.  (Laughter.)  
But Mary and Deanie, they are perfect examples of the kind of folks that we have here today -- women who are juggling your own families and careers.  As Jill said, you all are moving from state to state every couple of years, starting new jobs and putting the kids in a new school, and trying to adjust to all that, and figure out -- build a new community for yourselves over and over again.  You’ve been separated from your loved ones, whether you’ve been deployed yourself or you’ve had someone overseas.  
Yet through it all, you all somehow find time to reach out to others in your neighborhood.  This is the thing that we always want to -- that we always notice about the military community.  In the midst of everything you have to do, you're the ones, the first ones to raise your hands to volunteer at your kids’ school, in your community, at your church.  You're always stepping up, always trying to figure out how you can help.  And that's inspiring.  It's inspiring for me.  It's inspiring for Jill -- which is why we thank you, because you give us energy.  You give us strength.  You give us focus and purpose. 
And it is very easy to be your advocates, because you guys are awesome.  And this is just a small token, a small way that we can say thank you.  To open up this house and your beautiful, beautiful kids, and to just enjoy a day where you can look good, feel grand, have tea -- and whatever else we're giving you.  (Laughter.)  Some crumpets -- I saw some old sandwiches.  (Laughter.)  It’s so ladylike.  And a few good men here, too.  (Laughter.)  I tell the men, you're lucky to be hanging out with us today.  (Laughter.)  So act right.  Act right.  (Laughter and applause.)
But we are celebrating this year the fourth anniversary of Joining Forces.  Four years we've been at this work, and it feels like we've been doing it a lot longer because we've made so much progress.  We've been highlighting our local veteran centers, which a lot of folks don't know exist
… And a few good men here, too.  (Laughter.)  I tell the men you're lucky to be hanging out with us today.  (Laughter.)  So act right.  Act right.  (Laughter and applause.)
But we are celebrating this year the fourth anniversary of Joining Forces.  Four years we’ve been at this work, and it feels like we’ve been doing it a lot longer because we’ve so much progress.  We’ve been highlighting our local veterans centers, which a lot of folks don't know exist.  And those are out there for our veterans.  They're modernizing.  They're different.  They're accommodating the needs of the modern day veteran in ways that many people wouldn’t imagine.
We’ve been highlighting the efforts across the country to end veteran homelessness.  Cities like New Orleans have actually ended veteran homelessness.  And we’ve got many cities on the way to reaching that goal, as well.  We’ve been able to celebrate the new commitments to reach -- to hire and train our veterans, our transitioning servicemembers and our military spouses.
We’ve got commitments on top of the 850,000 veterans and spouses who have been hired to date over the past four years.  We were able to announce 10,000 more new commitments in the transportation and tech industries.  So we’re moving the needle step by step, lowering the unemployment rate among our veterans, and making sure that employers know the value that you all add by hiring the quality of folks that you represent.
And today I also want to highlight a wonderful program called Blue Star Museums, which gives active-duty military family member free access to the more than 2,000 museums across the country.  It’s a joint effort with Blue Star Families, the National Endowment for the Arts, and the Department of Defense, and it starts up again on Memorial Day and runs all summer long.
So we want to encourage military families out there, all across the country to take advantage of this opportunity.  Summer is coming, and we're looking for things to do with the kids.  (Laughter.)   You know that drill, take them to the museum.  We have some wonderful resources here.  And the fact that admission is going to be free is a real plus.
And that's just one of the many ways that organizations from across this country are teaming up to thank all of you for the service that you do for us.  That’s what Joining Forces is all about.  That was the vision that we had.  And along the way, we’ve tried to have a little fun -- that’s why we wanted you to bring your children here so that they could make you Mother’s Day gifts.  And they could -- they're very good.  Did you get your gifts yet?  Yes, pretty nice, huh?  Don't put the potpourri in the drawer yet.  (Laughter.)  You got to let it air out.  (Laughter.) 
But your kids are amazing.  They are smart.  They're delightful.  They're poised.  They're engaging.  They're courteous.  They're kind.  And you all should be proud.
Isn’t that best gift on Mother’s Day?  (Applause.)  Yes, yes.  So we’ve got one more special treat.  (Laughter.)  It’s just her face.  She’s a hoot.  (Laughter.)  But we have one more special treat.  We have a very special guest with us today who is going to grace us with a little music, which is why we have all this up here.  He’s an amazing, talented singer and songwriter.  And we are the “luckiest” to have him here at the White House.  Would you please join me in welcoming the one and only Ben Folds? (Applause.)
END           4:08 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 03, 2015
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at the 28th Annual Human Rights Campaign Atlanta Gala Dinner
Atlanta, Georgia
May 2, 2015
  Thank you, Chad, for that great introduction.  Hello, Atlanta!  I am so proud to be here with all of you tonight. 
I’d like to start by saying I think Chad is doing a phenomenal job leading HRC.  But, as a mother myself, I think we owe Chad’s parents – Betty and Butch Hightower – a round applause for doing such a great job of raising Chad.  
I’d also like to acknowledge Congressman John Lewis is here tonight.  He is an embodiment of courage, foresight, and lasting commitment.
It was so nice to meet Jim Obergefell, who’s here tonight as well, the lead plaintiff from the historic Supreme Court case argued earlier this week.  We’re with you, Jim. Keep up the fight!
It’s an honor to be here because I truly believe in the work that you do – that all of us do together – to advance equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender Americans.  As my husband Joe often says, this is the civil rights cause of our lifetime.
Joe and I came of age during a time when there was no Human Rights Campaign to proudly wave its flag of equality, yellow over blue, at rallies and in marches across the country.  Back then, a gathering like this would not just have been unthinkable; in many places, it would have been illegal.  Look how far we’ve come.
Last year, when Joe and I spoke at the HRC dinner in Los Angeles, he told a story from his youth about how his father drove him to the city courthouse in Wilmington, Delaware and while they were parked outside, Joe saw two men kissing each other goodbye.  Joe didn’t know what to think, but his father turned to him and explained: “they love each other. That’s the end.”
Because “love is love,” today – 50 years later – two men or two women can walk into the courthouse in that same city of Wilmington and get a marriage license.  And we won’t rest until that freedom to marry is available to any loving, committed couple in this country.  Look how far we’ve come.
I am proud to be here on behalf of an Administration that has done more to secure equality and justice for the LGBT community than any past Administration – combined.  Working with you, we: Repealed Don’t Ask Don’t Tell; ended the HIV travel ban; passed a hate crimes law bearing Matthew Shepard’s and James Byrd’s names; established a National HIV/AIDS Strategy; supported Gay Straight Alliances and aggressively pursued justice for LGBT students; stood up for the rights of LGBT people around the world; prohibited discrimination in federally funded programs; and, argued for the freedom to marry before the Supreme Court. These are your victories.
Now, I’m not a politician but I’ve been around politics long enough to recognize that nothing compares to the kind of sweeping change we have seen on LGBT issues in the last six years.  But ultimately, this isn’t about changing laws – it’s about changing lives.
Change is young people who are comfortable in their own skin and proud of who they are, because they know it gets better.  As an educator, I know the kind of bullying and harassment that some of my students face in the classroom, and the rejection they encounter at home.  I’ve read it in their journals, and I’ve even chastised an entire class for mistreating one my LGBT students.
Change is serving the country you love regardless of who you love.  As a military mom, I care deeply for our service members and their families.  I saw the burden that “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” and DOMA placed on so many of our military families – families who serve this nation with just as much courage and patriotism and sacrifice as any other military family. Today, because those discriminatory laws are no longer on the books, their lives are so much better, and they can worry about the things every family, every military family worries about: Deployment and return; raising their kids; and transitioning from service to civilian life. 
And, speaking of family, change is having a family that fully respects and affirms who you are.  Earlier in the program, you heard from a smart, talented, beautiful young woman from Delaware named Sarah McBride.  Can we give her another round of applause?  Now, Delaware isn’t a big state, so perhaps it comes as no surprise to all of you that Joe and I have known Sarah McBride and her family for many years.  The McBride’s are a giving family—who are always ready to step up and help out when you’re in need.  Sarah’s older brother went to high school with our daughter Ashley, and Sarah worked on our son Beau’s campaigns for Attorney General in 2006 and 2010. 
So I know a little more about her story – and I know that when she came out, her parents didn’t hesitate one moment.  They embraced the child that they love – the daughter they have, unequivocally.  Because they know what you know: treating people differently because of who they are is no different than the cruel laws John Lewis bravely fought against for years.  As Joe says, “I don’t care how you dress it up or how you justify it—prejudice is prejudice is prejudice.” And so, Sarah’s parents didn’t just stand with her at home; they stood with her before the Delaware legislature to fight for transgender equality and to demand dignity and fairness for their daughter.  Their embrace never yielded, from the morning she came out to them, to the afternoon her father walked her down the aisle, to the evening she lost her husband.  Isn’t that what parents are supposed to do?  Parents celebrate, support, and they comfort – because they see, and love, their child for who they truly are.
Now, Sarah will be the first to admit: she’s one of the lucky ones.  Because for every Sarah McBride there are – tragically – too many stories like Leelah Alcorn’s.  Instead of being accepted, Leelah was rejected. Instead of being supported, she was isolated. Instead of beginning her transition, she was forced into conversion therapy.  Leelah’s story is all too common in America today.  We know that 1 in 3 LGBT youth experiences some form of conversion therapy, and that this has devastating effects, including depression, substance abuse, and suicide.  It doesn’t have to be this way.  It can’t be this way.  That’s why I was so proud when our Administration recently stood up for children like Leelah—to condemn conversion therapy in all its forms, and issued a call for action.  Because we believe young people should be valued for who they are, no matter what they look like, where they’re from, the gender with which they identify, or who they love.
As an educator, as a military mom, and as a mother and grandmother, I know and have seen firsthand the importance of family in a time of need.  When our son Beau was deployed to Iraq in 2009 for a year, it wasn’t easy for our family but we supported one another.  A few years ago, I wrote a children’s book to share our family experience—of what life was like for our grandchildren, Natalie and Hunter, when their father was away at war.  I bring this up because children’s books have this amazing power to explain the simple truths in life.  Think about it: they teach us how to overcome adversity; how to live by the golden rule; and my favorite, that sharing is caring.
Twenty five years ago, another children’s book was published that describes how all families are not the same, but also not all that different.  I would like to read you quote from Heather Has Two Mommies: “It doesn’t matter how many mommies or how many daddies your family has.  It doesn’t matter if your family has sisters or brothers or cousins or grandmas or grandpas or uncles and aunts… The most important thing about a family is that all the people in it love each other.”
What was once controversial is now commonplace.  At its core, Heather Has Two Mommies was about the importance of family.  And, it seems only fitting that 25 years later the Supreme Court of the United States could issue a historic decision for the freedom to marry.
This happened because of all of you—because you came out and marched; because of heartbreaking stories of loss and rejection; and inspiring stories of love and acceptance.  We should celebrate moments like these that remind us that the moral arc of the universe may be long but it does bend towards justice.
We know that the work doesn’t end with a Supreme Court victory.  If we’ve learned anything from the story of civil rights and equality in America, it’s that real, lasting change requires long-term commitment.  Just ask John Lewis.  It means staying engaged and vigilant, and not taking progress for granted because, if you’re not careful, it can be taken away.  So do it for our kids and our families; for our service members and Heather’s two mommies; for Sarah McBride and Leelah Alcorn.  And know that Barack, Michelle, Joe and I will be with you every step of the way.
Thank you again for having me here.  God bless.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 23, 2015
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden the 67th Annual Israeli Independence Day Celebration
Andrew W. Mellon Auditorium
Washington, D.C.
7:29 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Ron, Mr. Ambassador, my name is Joe Biden, and everybody knows I love Israel. 
I was thinking as Ron was saying that he doesn't know what it’s like in Catholic families -- whether we argue as much as allegedly occurs in Jewish families.  Well, I settled all that.  Two of my three children married Jews.  (Laughter.)  And you want to see what happens then.  (Laughter.) 
As a matter of fact, my daughter -- I -- the dream of every Irish-Catholic father is for his daughter to marry a Jewish surgeon.  (Laughter.)  And she did.
But I want you to know I think the only time on record, at least in the state of Delaware, in the oldest Catholic church in the state, the second oldest -- 1842 -- we signed the ketubah in the Catholic rectory.  (Laughter.)  Not a joke.  (Laughter.)  Not a joke.  I think that's a first.  We had a chuppah on the altar, handmade, magnificently, beautiful chuppah.  And we had a Catholic priest, Father Murphy, and a rabbi, and it was hard getting a rabbi, by the way.  (Laughter.)  I had to go up to Montgomery County to find one.  (Laughter.)  And the reason why -- Montgomery County, Pennsylvania -- and the reason he came is his mother loved me.  (Laughter.)  But -- and my daughter asked me, she said, Daddy, what do you want played at the wedding?  I said, just one -- maybe the concluding hymn could be “On Eagles’ Wings”.
And so the rabbi was a wonderful guy, literally presided over 75 percent of the wedding.  The vows were administered by the Catholic priest.  And as the wedding party was departing, as the bride and groom were departing down the aisle, they played the hora.  (Laughter.)  So I figured it out.  One way to end arguments is to marry.  (Laughter.) 
Look, the fact of the matter is that 77 years [sic] ago, at midnight on May 14, 1948, against all odds, in the wake of searing tragedy, defiant in the face of overwhelming military numbers massed on its borders, the modern State of Israel was born.   (Applause.)
What you did next was no less than miraculous.  You were blessed with one of the greatest generations of founding fathers and mothers of any nation in the history of the world -- Ben-Gurion, Meir, Begin, Sharon, Rabin, Peres.  They all fashioned Israel into a vibrant, vibrant democracy. 
And in the process, you built one of the most innovative societies on Earth.  In the process, you defended your homeland and became the most powerful military in the entire region.  And all these years later, things have changed, but the danger still exists.  But the people of Israel still live in a dangerous neighborhood.  And just to be an Israeli -- it still demands uncommon courage.
Much has changed, but two things have remained absolutely the same: the courage of your people and the commitment of mine.  (Applause.)   
So today, we celebrate your independence and our friendship, which was born just 11 minutes after Israel’s founding.  And President Obama and I are proud to carry forward the unbroken line of American leaders –- Democrat and Republican —- who have honored America’s sacred promise to protect the homeland of the Jewish people.
It’s no secret that, like administrations before us, as the Ambassador said, we’ve had our differences.  I have been here for a long time, for eight Presidents.  I’ve witnessed disagreements between administrations.  It’s only natural for two democracies like ours.  As Ron said, we’re like family.  We have a lot to say to one another.  Sometimes we drive each other crazy.  But we love each other.  And we protect each other.   (Applause.)
And it’s hard to see with these lights, but I suspect I know many of you personally.  As many of you heard me say before, were there no Israel, America would have to invent one.  We’d have to invent one because Ron is right, you protect our interests like we protect yours.  (Applause.)
So let’s get something straight.  In this moment of some disagreement occasionally between our governments, I want to set the record straight on one thing:  No President has ever done more to support Israel’s security than President Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
Just look at the facts.  Each time a rocket has rained down from Gaza, President Obama stands up before the world and defends Israel’s right to defend itself like any other nation. 
Under President Obama, with the United States Congress, America has provided $20 billion in military assistance to Israel -– and cutting edge weaponry needed to maintain the qualitative advantage against any potential opponent. 
You all know the stories of Iron Dome.  What you may not know is that next year, we will deliver to Israel the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter –- our finest -– making Israel the only country in the Middle East with a fifth-generation aircraft.  No other.  (Applause.)
And we continue to discuss, as the Israeli military here and the intelligence communities will tell you in Israel as well as here -- we continue to discuss what more must be done in the near term and the long term to continue to strengthen Israel so she can maintain that edge.  (Applause.)
Our commitment to protect Israel’s security in my case and many of your case is not just political or national interest, it’s personal.  It’s personal for me and it’s personal for the President.
You've heard me say this many of my friends out there before, but it bears repeating on this day, it began at my father’s dinner table.  My father was a righteous Christian.  We assembled to eat, to have discussions -- and occasionally eat.  My father talked about how he could not understand why there was a debate among Americans or why there was a debate among American Jews about whether or not we should have recognized Israel; why there would be any debate about why we hadn’t done more; why we hadn’t -- that's where I first learned about not bombing the railroad tracks.  I learned from my father about the concentration camps.  And the first thing I did with my children when each of them turned 15, I took them to Europe, flew them directly to Dachau, and made them spend a day there with me.  And I’ve done the same with my grandchildren.  My grandchild Finnegan as recently as just a month ago where we met with a 94-year-old survivor of Auschwitz, as well as Dachau.  He showed us the camp because he was proud -- proud -- to welcome the Vice President and his granddaughter.
All you have to do to understand is stand on the Golan and look down.  I remember the first time I did that as a young senator.  All you have to do is wander throughout Israel.  All you have to do is take that helicopter ride the entire length of the fence.  All you have to do is just look at the map.  All you had to is set foot at Yad Vashem -— and you understand. 
I’ve had the great privilege of knowing every Israeli Prime Minister since Golda Meir and more than just casually.  And I’ve worked with many of you in this room for up to 40 years.  You know me.  You raised me.  You educated me.  And I know you. 
So believe me when I tell you:  It’s not only personal to me, it’s personal to President Obama, as well.  The President was raised with memories of his great-uncle, who marched with Patton’s Army to liberate Jewish prisoners from the horrors of Buchenwald.  As a young man, he grew up learning about Israel from the stories of Leon Uris’ in “Exodus”; the Six-Day War; and Moshe Dayan, with his eye patch and his courage.  I remember sitting in front of Golda Meir’s desk as she flipped those maps up and down, chain-smoking, talking about the losses of the Six-Day War, sitting next to her military attaché at the time, a guy named Rabin.
But Barack, as a young senator -- being 19 years younger than I am, he heard about it.  He read about it.  As senator, Barack Obama went to a small town in southern Israel to see with his own eyes the lives of the families who live under threat of rockets -– families that he has helped protect as Commander-in-Chief, under Iron Dome. 
As President, he stood in Jerusalem, and declared to the whole world, “Those who adhere to the ideology of rejecting Israel’s right to exist, they might as well reject the earth beneath them or the sky above, because Israel is not going anywhere.  So long as the United States of America is there, Israel will never be alone.”  (Applause.)  He means it.  He means it.  You know I mean it.  I’m telling you he means it.
That’s my President.  He understands the need for Israel to have the right and the capacity and the capability to defend itself.  At the same time, he says, “we have Israel’s back” -- and you can count on it.
The same commitment to the survival and security of Israel is fundamental to our strategy for the entire Middle East.  And then we get into the controversial piece.  Iran.  Remember this is the President who made it for the first time in American history a declared policy of the United States to use all the instruments of our power to prevent -— not contain, prevent –- Iran from ever acquiring a nuclear weapon.  He stated that all options are on the table -— then he made sure of what did not exist before.  He made sure we spent the time and money and the research to develop the capacity required to act against their capacity to develop a weapon if ever needed.
Over the skepticism of many, we worked with the U.S. Congress, our European allies, and Russia, China, to put in place the toughest sanctions regime in modern history.
We also knew the cost of not negotiating.  Midway through the last administration, the U.S. government refused to directly engage.  It insisted at the same time that Iran dismantle its entire program.
The result?  By the time President Bush left office, Iran had dramatically advanced its movement toward ability to acquire a nuclear weapon.  So we’ve taken a different approach, combining unprecedented pressure with direct diplomacy to find an enduring solution. 
Negotiations began.  And we’ve come a long way.  And you’ve all seen the parameters that were put forward.  It’s a framework, only a framework -- not a final deal.  A great deal of work lies ahead to see if Iran will actually enshrine the commitments that went into that framework as part of a final deal.
If they do, each of Iran’s paths to a bomb would be meaningfully and verifiably blocked.  Iran would cut its enrichment capacity by two-thirds; shrink its stockpile of low-enriched uranium by 98 percent.  Breakout time to create a weapon’s worth of bomb-grade material will go from two to three months, which it is today, to over a year.
The deal would ensure at least a one-year breakout cushion for a decade.  And for years after that, the breakout time would continue to be longer than it exists today.
We’ll prevent the Arak reactor from ever being a source of plutonium for nuclear weapons.  We will put in place the toughest transparency and verification requirements in history -— providing the best possible check against a secret path to the bomb.
This isn’t a grand bargain between the United States and Iran.  It’s a nuclear bargain between Britain, France, Russia, China, Germany, the EU, America and Iran.  It’s based on hard-hitting, hard-headed, uncompromising assessments of what is required to protect ourselves, Israel, the region, and the world.
And if the final deal on the table that doesn’t meet the President’s requirements, we simply will not sign it.  
A final deal must effectively cut off Iran’s pathways to the bomb.  If it doesn’t, no deal.
A final deal must ensure a breakout timeline at least for one year for a decade.  If it doesn’t, no deal. 
A final deal must include phased sanctions relief, calibrated against Iran taking meaningful steps to constrain their program.  If it doesn’t, no deal. 
A final deal must provide a verifiable assurance to the international community demands to ensure Iran’s program is exclusively peaceful going forward.  If it doesn’t, no deal. 
And if Iran cheats at any time and goes for a nuclear weapon –- every option we have to respond today remains on the table.  And your military will tell you, and more.
I’ve been involved in arms control negotiations since I was a kid in the Senate at 30 years of age -- every major SALT agreement, START agreement, and toward the end, I was deeply involved negotiating when Brezhnev was still around, leading a delegation of senators.  But just like arms control talks with the Soviet Union —- another regime we fundamentally disagreed with, another regime whose rhetoric was outrageous and unacceptable, another regime whose proxies were forcefully making trouble, and we forcefully countered around the world –- we negotiated to reduce the nuclear threat to prevent a nuclear war.  And it kept us safer.  That’s what we’re attempting to do today.
We also continue to agree with Israeli leaders going back decades –- from Rabin to Sharon, whose funeral I had the great honor of eulogizing –- that a two-state solution is essential to Israel’s long-term survival as a democratic homeland for the Jewish people.   Consistent with our commitment to Israel’s security and survival, the United States stands ready to help Israel decide -- if they decide -- how to get there and if they want our help in getting there.
I’ll always remember what my friend and mentor, and Holocaust survivor who worked for me as my national security advisor before he became Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Tom Lantos once said.  He said, “the veneer of civilization is paper thin.  We are its guardians and can never rest.”
That’s why we must never retreat from fighting every scourge and source of anti-Semitism as we find it.  You see, in too many places where legitimate criticism crosses over into bigotry and anti-Semitism; where an explicitly anti-Semitic attack takes place at a kosher grocery store; assaults on religious Jews in the streets of major European capitals.  Some of you may remember how harshly I was criticized as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee over 15 years ago when I held hearings on anti-Semitism in Europe.  Emerson said, society is like a wave, the wave moves on, but the particles remain the same.  Wherever, in whatever country, whatever circumstance it rears its head, we have to stop it. 
Enough is enough.   We have to fight it everywhere we find it. 
I’ll conclude -- and my friends kid me and I imagine Ron may, as well -- telling you the story about my meeting with Golda Meir.  The reason I do it had a profound impact on me, one of the most consequential meetings I’ve ever had in my life.  I think I’ve met every major world leader in the last 36 or 37 years in the world, in a literal sense.
But I remember meeting for close to an hour with her.  She went through what happened in the Six-Day War, and the price that was paid.  And I just had come from Egypt.  They let me go to Egypt and go to the Suez Canal.  And I was saying to she and Rabin that I thought that they were getting ready to attack again.  And everyone including my military and Israeli military thought I was crazy.
I remember driving from Cairo all the way to out to the Suez.  And you could see these great plumes of dust and sand.  But none it seemed isolated.  It turns out it was maneuvers taking place in the desert.  And I was really worried.  And we went through, and she painted a bleak, bleak picture -- scared the hell out of me, quite frankly, about the odds. 
And all of a sudden she looked at and she said, would you like a photograph?  And I said, yes, ma’am.  And those double-blind doors opened up into that hallway -- not hallway.  It looks like -- it’s a foyer.  And we walked out, and the press was standing there.  We didn't say anything.  We just stood side by side.  And she must have thought I looked worried.  And it’s an absolutely true story.  She didn't look at me, she spoke to me.  She said, Senator, you look so worried.  I said, well, my God, Madam Prime Minister, and I turned to look at her.  I said, the picture you paint.  She said, oh, don't worry.  We have -- I thought she only said this to me.  She said, we have a secret weapon in our conflict with the Arabs.  You see, we have no place else to do.
I was criticized in the national press a couple weeks ago when I said that, in fact, every Jew in the world needs there to be an Israel.  And it was characterized by some of the conservative press as saying that I was implying Jews weren’t safe in America.  They don't get it.  They don't get it.  Israel, Israel is absolutely essential -- absolutely essential -- security of Jews around the world.  And that's why you have never farmed out your security.  You’ve accepted all the help we could give.  The most admirable thing about you is you’ve never asked us to fight for you.  But I promise you, if you were attacked and overwhelmed, we would fight for you, in my view.  (Applause.)
The truth of the matter is we need you.  The world needs you.  Imagine what it would say about humanity and the future of the 21st century if Israel were not sustained, vibrant and free.
We’ll never stop working to ensure that Jews from around the world always have somewhere to go.  We’ll never stop working to make sure Israel has a qualitative edge.  And whomever the next President is -- Republican or Democrat -- it will be the same because the American people, the American people are committed.  The America people understand. 
So I say happy birthday, Israel.  Happy Independence Day.  May God bless you and may God bless and protect the United States of America.  Thank you all so very much.  (Applause.)
END
7:52 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 17, 2015
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden Before Joining Forces Roundtable -- Silver Spring, Maryland
Silver Spring Vets Center
Silver Spring, Maryland
1:22 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you for having us here today.  And we want to -- I know I speak for Michelle, too, when we say thank you from our husbands, and thank you for all that you’re doing.
So one of the most rewarding parts of being Second Lady for me has been traveling around the country and visiting our military families, and Michelle and I have been doing this now for six years.  And we just had a tour of the facility with Wayne and saw all the wonderful things that you have here and all the things that are available.
And so the reason we’re here today is to just -- to listen to you, to listen to your experiences and to learn from you.  So thank you again for having us.
MRS. OBAMA:  And also we think this -- for me -- this is a big, old light right here.  (Laughter.)  But it’s really reflective of what we hope our visit can do, which is to shine a light on vet centers, the work that’s happening, the support that’s out there.  Because, as we talked to the counselor, there are a lot of veterans who don’t know that these resources exist, and that’s the thing that we want to change.
Every vet, every family member should know that there are places like this that feel like home, with people who are professional, that are trained, who know how to deal with any issue that you all encounter.  So this time here today is really about the others who don’t have access or don’t know that these resources exist.
So we’re just grateful to you all.  And we’re also extremely proud of you guys.  And I know you don’t hear that enough, because we can’t say it enough as a nation.  You all have sacrificed for this country time and again.  And Jill and I, through Joining Forces and our husbands, we’ve made the issue of supporting our veterans, our troops and their families the top of our priority list.  And the goal is to make sure that this doesn’t stop at this administration, but -- we set a high bar, but we hope that every other administration will surpass that bar when it comes to caring for you all forever.
So we can’t say it enough -- we’re very proud of Wayne.  He’s a passionate representative of this facility, as well as his staff.  So what better place to bring the media than right here. 
So thanks for taking the time.  And Jill and I are really excited to hear about your experiences, and feel free to share with us anything more that needs to happen.  Because we’ve got all the bigwigs here, so if there are things that we can improve upon, things that we need to know, we’re -- Jill and I are also interested in hearing that, as well. 
END  
1:26 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 09, 2015
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on Iraq
The National Defense University
Washington, D.C.
12:38 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  General Padilla, thank you very much for the introduction.  And it is genuinely an honor to be here before such an incredibly distinguished audience.  And, Ambassador Nesbitt, thank you.  She is a senior vice president.  I’m just a Vice President.  (Laughter.)  These days I don't like the word senior associated with my name.  (Laughter.)  Provost Yaeger, and finally I’d like to say to Ambassador Failly, the -- Iraq’s Ambassador to the United States -- it’s an honor to have you here, as well today.  Military officers, men and women, and Brian McKeon -- how you doing, Brian?  Brian doesn't want to tell anybody. He’s in the Defense Department now, but he worked with me since he got out of the University of Notre Dame, and that was 412 years ago.  (Laughter.)  But at any rate, it’s good to see you, Brian.
Next week, Prime Minister Abadi will make his first visit to Washington, D.C.  And this provides us with an opportunity to take stock of where things stand right now.  And that's going to be the focus, with your permission, of my remarks today.
Critics have made a number of claims regarding our policy in Iraq and the state of affairs in Iraq today.  They say that Iraq’s fight against ISIL -- under the command of the Iraqi government, backed by America and an international coalition -— has stalled, has been stalemated.  We read that ISIL remains in a commanding position inside of Iraq; that Iran and its proxies are leading the fight against ISIL, and that they are dominating Iraq; and that Iraq itself is likely to be a thing of the past, doomed to split apart because of sectarian violence.
There’s just one problem with these critiques:  The claims do not reflect the circumstances on the ground.  The claims do not respect and represent the circumstances on the ground.
They don’t reflect Iraq’s progress against ISIL -–  incomplete but significant and growing; Iraq’s resilience and unity in confronting the crisis many predicted would split them apart; or Iraq’s resolve to uphold their sovereignty and their independence -– even as they look to their neighbors in all directions for assistance. 
The jury is still out.  That's the truth.  It’s not over yet.  But the momentum is in the right direction.  I’d like to speak about that for a few moment’s today.
It is true that when ISIL swept into Ninewa last summer and took its capital, Mosul, we saw the collapse of the Iraqi army --we saw it melt away -- the horrific slaughter of innocent civilians; and the enslavement of women; ethnic cleansing of minority groups, including Christians who had lived in Mosul for over a thousand years.
ISIL gained significant amounts of money from the banks that they robbed, significant and sophisticated military equipment left behind by Iraqi forces, and manpower from brutal conscription and foreign fighters, and maybe most dangerously a sense of momentum, even a sense of inevitability which seemed to attract more foreign fighters.
That’s why, when Mosul fell, President Obama responded decisively.  Within hours, he took steps with all of you, the military, to make sure that all our people in our embassy were secure.  Within days, we put Special Forces into the field temporarily to better understand the battle space.  We surged intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.  And we set up a Joint Operations Center in both Baghdad and in Erbil -— all to prepare to help the Iraqis fight back.
We knew though that the first order of business was to make sure that Iraq had a functioning, inclusive government.  For all the years I spent in dealing with Iraqi public officials and the Iraqi government, we knew for certain without a united Iraqi government, there was no possibility -- none -- of defeating ISIL.
When Mosul fell, Iraq had just held their national election.  Fourteen million -- roughly 14 million Iraqis had shown up at the polls.  But now they had to form a government in the middle of this chaos.  And having been deeply, deeply involved, as Brian McKeon will tell you because he was with me, trying to help form the first government and being engaged, we knew this could be extremely difficult [sic].
During the term of the last government, distrust had deepened so profoundly between Sunni, Shia, and Kurds -— creating serious obstacles to a unified effort against ISIL and a questioned willingness of whether they were willing to literally stay together.
But the irony -- the irony of all ironies -- is that Iraq was actually -- helped form its government because of ISIL.  ISIL the very outfit that intended to tear Iraq apart and establish a caliphate, it actually united Iraqis.
The Sunnis realized they preferred a united, federal Iraq under a new government to being at the mercy of ISIL or dependent upon the other Sunni states.  The Kurds realized that withdrawing from Iraq was not a viable option, and they did not want a terrorist state on their doorstep.  I don’t know how many conversations I had with President Barzani relating to this. And the Shia, they realized they didn’t want to take on ISIL alone or become a vassal of a neighboring state. Consequently, they each concluded they were better off if they were in this together.  And to quote a famous American politician in an early war of ours, we either hang together or hang separately.
The Iraqis themselves recognized how badly the trust had been broken among them.  Nothing less than a comprehensive change could deliver a united Iraqi government that could effectively take on ISIL, and many Iraqi leaders believed that the only way to do this, as I believed, was a wholesale change in leadership; that every interest in Iraq had to find different leaders this time to occupy the seats of power.
I remember speaking to -- with Usama Nujayfi, a proud son of Mosul, who had been the speaker of Iraqi’s parliament, and him deciding that in order to make way for a new wave of leaders, it was very important -- which he thought was important as well -- that he would have to step down as speaker. 
And so there was a need, from the speaker to the Prime Minister to the president, to find new leaders.  And the result was -- another widely respected Sunni, Salim Jabouri, became the new parliamentary speaker, and Iraq chose Fuad Masum, a well-respected Kurdish senior statesman, to be the new president.  And he stuck to his convictions under enormous pressure -- because you know how the process works -- he, the president, is the one that then turns to one of the factions to form a government.
There was an enormous amount of pressure, but he stuck to his guns.  And he named Haider al-Abadi, the Prime Minister, a Shia leader who had built up majority support within the Shia National Alliance, which won a majority of the votes.  There was a consensus among these leaders that Iraq would need a much greater measure of functioning federalism, which is called for in the constitution.  They all agreed to that.  That common understanding backed by genuine acts of statesmanship has led to significant progress.  And the chance of a long-term unity government here. 
In just eight months, Prime Minister Abadi and other Iraqi leaders have formed an inclusive government, in record time, arrived at a national budget with equitable revenue sharing, forged an oil deal between Baghdad and Erbil.  I don’t know how many times Brian and I sat there over the 23 visits into Iraq being told there’s an oil deal just over the horizon.  Never occurred.  But in the face of this crisis, they pulled that together. 
They built a consensus and began to mobilize thousands of Sunni fighters to fight against ISIL.  And just this past week, Prime Minister Abadi visited Erbil, met with President Barzani to discuss cooperation with the Peshmerga forces in a plan, coordinated by General Austin in part, to help liberate Mosul.  Yesterday, he was in Anbar Province announcing the delivery of over 1,000 weapons for Sunni tribes in preparation for the liberation of Anbar, in part, as part of his commitment that he made to Sunni leaders in the formation of the government.
More efforts to organize, arm, and integrate the Sunnis willing to fight ISIL are going to be needed in the months ahead to liberate Anbar and Mosul.  And the Prime Minister has also tried to improve relations with his Arab neighbors and Turkey.  He’s visited Amman, Cairo, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait, Ankara.  And for the first time since 1990, Saudi Arabia has agreed to open an embassy in Baghdad at the invitation of a Shia Iraqi president.
These are only initial, but these are very -- I promise you having done this for the last 12 years -- very promising, promising steps.  Obviously a great deal of work remains, including moving forward on the national guard legislation, legislation designed to advance national reconciliation including de-Ba’athification, continuing to mobilize and integrate and arm and pay Sunni forces, further integrate the Pesh into the Iraqi national security force, bringing volunteer forces under the command and control of elected Iraqi governments, empowering local governance and planning for reconstruction in the liberated areas consistent with their notion of federalism. 
All of which, all of which we will be discussing with Prime Minister Abadi -- not that we haven’t discussed it a lot.  He and I have probably spent more time on the phone than we have -- I have with my wife.  (Laughter.) 
The entire region -- the entire world -- but the entire region-- is watching this closely, and Iraqi leaders can’t afford to lose that sense of political urgency that brought them to this point. 
And much hinges on the Prime Minister, but not the Prime Minister alone. Ultimately, this is about all of Iraqi leaders pulling together and they must continue to compromise.  And it is hard.  It is hard.  Thousands of bodies have been strewn and lost in the interim.  But they’re doing it.  We knew that in addition to forming a united Iraqi government, the next challenge would be to help them put back together an ability to be able to position itself and succeed on the battlefield. 
That started with helping Iraqis reorganize and reconstitute the security forces.  For years, in the face of terrorism and insurgency, many Iraqis have fought bravely and given their lives.  Thousands have given their lives in the fight against ISIL.  That would challenge any army.
But as we saw last summer, some units, including those in Mosul, had been hollowed out with corruption, questionable leadership appointments, a lack of discipline, sectarian in-fighting.  And the collapse helped make the fall of Mosul possible.
So we began to help Iraqi leaders rebuild their forces with hires based on competence, not on ethnicity.  Abadi appointed a number of former military officers -- or, excuse me, relieved a number of former military officers, and appointed new officers.  He appointed a Sunni from Mosul as Defense Minister.  He replaced 36 commanders in November, and he continues to reform Iraq’s military leadership.
We sent our Special Forces to assess which Iraqi units could actually be salvaged.  And under the leadership of General Austin, we began working with the Iraqi military to reconstitute their divisions.  We are now training and have continued to train Iraqi forces at four different sites across the country.  Six thousand have already graduated; thousands more are in the pipeline. 
And we’re supplying weapons and critical equipment.  Since the fall of 2014, the United States has delivered over 100 million rounds of ammunition; 62,000 small arms systems; 1,700 Hellfire missiles.  Two hundred fifty mine-resistant ambush protected vehicles -- MRAPs -- were delivered in December that are now protecting Iraqi forces and Pesh forces from mines and homemade bombs.  And 50 additional MRAPs with mine rollers will begin transfer to Iraq this week.  
At Al Asad Air Force Base that many of you served in and were part of securing, we’re training, advising, and assisting Iraqi army forces who, in turn, are training and mobilizing Sunni fighters; Iraqi National Security Forces training Sunni tribesmen. 
We also brought Iraqi pilots to the United States, who are in advanced stages of flight training in Arizona, to enhance their capacity to defend their country in the air.
And we’re not doing it alone.  We led and mobilized a massive international coalition of over 60 partners -- NATO allies, Arab nations, and many others -- to help take on ISIL.  It’s not just a military coalition.  It’s a global effort to weaken ISIS across the board, from undercutting its messaging to tracking its foreign fighters.
And several nations are providing significant support in Iraq.  Eight coalition partners have launched over 500 airstrikes in Iraq.  The Spaniards, Australians, Danes, and others have provided trainers and advisors inside Iraq.  The French, the Dutch, the U.K., Canada, Germany, Italy and others are working with us to train and resupply the Kurdish Peshmerga who have reclaimed a significant portion of the territory initially gained by ISIL.  And several countries, including Japan and Saudi Arabia have also made significant non-military contributions in areas such as development assistance and humanitarian aid. 
A majority within each of the Iraqi constituencies and communities supports this U.S. effort and these coalition efforts.  Leaders from across the Iraqi political spectrum have publicly asked for our help and our continued help. 
And we’re providing that help in a smarter way -- small numbers of advisors backed by a large coalition.  And this large coalition is backed up by the most capable air force in the world.  We are pounding ISIL from the sky, nearly 1,300 U.S. airstrikes alone.  Thus far, thankfully, we have not lost -- knock on wood -- a single solitary U.S. serviceman to enemy fire, not one.  But this is a dangerous, dangerous, dangerous place.
With our assistance, Iraqis have made significant progress on the battlefield.  Eight months ago, ISIL was on the offensive everywhere in Iraq.  No force in Iraq or Syria had proven capable to defeating ISIL head on, but today in Iraq, ISIL has lost large areas it used to dominate, from Babil to Diyala, to Ninewa, to Salahadin -- excuse me -- Kirkuk Province.  ISIL has been defeated at Mosul Dam, Mount Sinjar, and now Tikrit.
ISIL’s momentum in Iraq has halted, and in many places, has been flat-out reversed.  Thousands of ISIL fighters have been removed from the battlefield.  Their ability to mass and maneuver has been greatly degraded.  Leaders have been eliminated.  Supply lines have been severed.  Weapons, check points, fighting positions, IED factories, safe houses have been destroyed.  And reports of demoralization within ISIL ranks are rife.  And some ISIL fighters refusing to fight; foreign fighters being killed by ISIL because they want to return home.
There’s still a long fight ahead.  I don’t want to paint an overly rosy picture here.  But the -- ISIL’s aura of invincibility has been pierced, and that’s important. 
Let me give you once recent example, where Iraqi’s military capability was tested, as well as, quite frankly, its political leadership was tested. 
Three weeks ago -- in every newspaper in the West and here in the United States and on the news -- the speculation was that the United States, the coalition, and Iraqi’s elected leaders had been sidelined in the fight against ISIL, particularly in Tikrit.  Military forces backed primarily by Iran were running the show.  And you saw pictures, and they made it clear, Soleimani made it clear that everybody would see he was there; the implication being, we now own Iraq.
Then something changed.  The attack stalled.  And minister -- and Prime Minister Abadi stepped up.  He courageously stepped in, making it absolutely clear that the Iraqi government, him, as Commander-in-Chief, was in charge of this operation.  When I spoke with him, he made it clear to me that he wanted the United States and the coalition to engage all over Iraq, was his phrase. And explicitly, he wanted us engaged and requested support in Tikrit.  His call was joined by that of Sunni leaders as well as the most senior religious leader in the country, Grand Ayatollah Sistani who declared that the Iraqi government had to be in the lead; that the units had to be directly under the command -- all units -- under the command of the Iraqi government; and that Sunnis had to be included in the liberation of their own communities.
And we made clear-- General Austin -- that we were prepared to help in the battle with volunteers both Shia and Sunni fighting alongside Iraqi forces, but only if all elements in the fight operated strictly under the chain of command of the Iraqi military.  Because that’s the only way we could ensure the safety of those on the ground and minimize the risk of friendly fire. 
Today, Iraq’s national flag -- not ISIL’s -- hangs over the city of Tikrit. 
But success brings new challenges:  Holding liberated areas, policing them with forces that are trusted by the community in the community that they’re returning home to; transiting governing authority back to local officials, as envisioned in their federal system; restoring vital public services. 
And in the face of reports relating to Tikrit that there was mass looting and burning of homes, the Prime Minister stepped up, took swift action.  He condemned the abuses, ordering the militia out of the city, ensuring regular forces are patrolling those seats, and frankly acknowledged the degree of loss that had occurred, hiding nothing.
Once inside Tikrit, Iraqi soldiers uncovered execution grounds where ISIL murdered as many as 1,700 young men last summer and poured them into mass graves.  And as I speak, mass graves are still being found, a stark reminder of the brutality of ISIL and the need for its defeat.
While this battle continues inside Iraq, we’re also taking the fight to ISIL in Syria.  The international coalition has now launched over 1,300 airstrikes against ISIL and other terrorists inside of Syria -- bombed refineries that have been taken over by ISIL, the oil both refined and crude being used to fund their operations, eliminating that as a source of revenue.  We’ve embarked on a train and equip program under the Defense Department to take on ISIL and protect Syrian communities.  In Kobane, killing thousands of its fighters and providing ISIL -- and proving ISIL can be beaten inside of Syria, as well.
However, the regional challenge for Iraq extends beyond Syria.  For years now, Iraq has risked being pulled apart by a wide range of sectarian competition internally and externally.  But the reality is that Iraqis do not want to be drawn into regional conflicts.  They don’t want to be owned by anybody.  Everybody forgets there was a war not but a decade before where over 100,000 were killed, a war with Iran, their neighbor.  They don't want to be puppets dangling on a string of anyone’s puppeteering in the region.
Don’t underestimate the power of Iraqi national pride, independence, and sovereignty.  It’s only natural that Iraq will have relations with all of its neighbors, including Iran.  The history is too long.  The border is too long.  And it’s a difficult neighborhood.  But Iraq must be free to make its own sovereign choices under the authority of elected representatives of an Iraqi government.
We want what Iraqis want:  a united, federal, and democratic Iraq that is defined by its own constitution where power is shared among all Iraqi communities, where a sovereign government exercises command and control over the forces in the field.  And that's overwhelmingly what the Iraqis want.
So I go back to the focus on, Mr. Ambassador, on the Iraqi government.  When the three major constituencies -- Sunni, Shia and Kurd -- are united in wanting a whole and prosperous Iraq, the likelihood of being pulled into the orbit of any single nation in the region is diminished exponentially because this would represent the only -- the only government in the region that actually is not based on sectarian dominance. 
This is going to be a long haul.  The ultimate success or failure is in the hands of the Iraqis.  But as they stand up and stand together, this administration, this country, is committed to stand with them. 
I need not tell this audience since 2003 more than 1.5 million American women and men, including my son, have spent significant amounts of time on Iraqi soil.  Every single morning since I have been Vice President, before as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, we contact the Defense Department, and I ask the same question.  Give me the exact number of Americans who’ve given their lives on Iraqi soil and Afghan soil.  Give me the exact number, not a generalization, exact number of those who have been wounded and are lost in Afghanistan.  Because no audience knows more than this -- every one of those lives, every one of those brave women and men represents a community.  Represents a family and a larger family. 
Only 1 percent of all Americans have waged these fights for us, but 99 percent of all America owes them support and recognition; 4,481 Americans have given their lives on Iraqi soil, including many who served alongside the people in this room.  I’ll bet every one of you in uniform know somebody who was lost or wounded. 
And although our mission is significantly different today -- you may ask why am I focusing on this -- although our mission is significantly different today than it was during that period, there are still men and women in uniform in Iraq making sacrifices as I speak from protecting our embassy, to training and equipping Iraqis, to flying sorties. 
And all of you who wear the uniform know that one of the loneliest feelings for your family -- particularly if they don’t live on a base -- is while every other kid in school, while every other family at church, while every other family in the neighborhood thinks everything is fine, Dad or Mom is not home for that birthday.  They're missing that graduation.  They're not there for Christmas or to make a Thanksgiving toast. 
We have an obligation.  We have an obligation.  And just because we no longer have 160,000 troops there, it’s an obligation that's intense and as real as it was when we had 160,000 troops there.  They warrant our support.  Their families warrant our deep gratitude. 
And so, folks, as a country, our one shared obligation is to give them what they need on the battlefield and care for them when they come home. 
Their blood and toil helped give Iraq another chance.  Our mission now is to help the Iraqis themselves make the most of this.
Thank you all for listening, but most of all, thank you for your service. 
May God bless the United States of America and may God protect our troops.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
1:10 P.M.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 01, 2015
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at Virginia Community College System’s 2015 New Horizons Conference
Good afternoon! Thank you so much, Glenn, for that warm introduction.
I can truly say I feel right at home with all of you.  You are not just an audience of community college educators, faculty members and administrators – you all are my peers! 
Many of my students are just like yours—determined to improve their lives, to provide for their families, and make a difference in their communities.  So, being here today is particularly exciting for me.
Community college teachers are a special breed of cat. We take this responsibility home. It doesn’t end when you walk out of the classroom. We’re invested in our students’ future, like they are our own children. We cajole, we counsel, we mentor. We try to do it all.
Six and a half years ago, as all of you know, my life changed dramatically.  Within the span of a semester, I went from planning my syllabus at Del Tech to planning a move to Washington, D.C..  So many things were bound to change, but I was determined to keep one thing constant: teaching.  I often say teaching is not what I do; it’s who I am.  Whether I was living in Delaware or D.C., I knew I had to teach.  I cannot imagine not teaching.  I have taught for over 30 years and 20 of them have been at a community college. 
What I love most about teaching is the students.  Like many of you have experienced, students arrive in our classrooms, eager to create a brighter future for themselves and their families.  We have taught veterans who return to the classroom to complete their education as they look to transition to civilian careers.  We have seen workers return to school to retool their skills to reach the next level in their fields. 
As we have all seen, more and more people are realizing that a high school degree is just not enough—and they are turning to community colleges to provide them with the opportunity they deserve to reach their full potential.  Currently, nearly half of the 18 million undergraduate students attend one of America’s community colleges.  But, let’s be honest—simply enrolling in a community college isn’t enough.  It is important that we retain students and help them earn their degree, because by the end of this decade two-thirds of all job openings will require some form of higher education.
There’s also a new reality for most returning students—they go back to school, while maintaining a full time job or raising children, and in many cases both.
I remember what it was like to go back to school under the best circumstances—with a supportive husband, coworkers and friends—it wasn’t easy.  So, it should be no surprise then that less than half of the students who attend a community college will either graduate or transfer to a four-year school within six years.
But, we must do more to help our students succeed. I believe the responsibility for educating students is not the student’s alone.  It is a responsibility that belongs to all of us. 
That’s one of the reasons why my dissertation focused on student retention in community colleges and why, when I started teaching at Northern Virginia Community College, I wanted to help women who were returning to school.  And I wasn’t alone. So, we started the Women’s Mentoring Project, which pairs women who are over 30 years-old with a faculty member. As part of the program, I helped one woman who was writing her scholarship essay for admittance to a 4-year college.  Her path had not been easy. She left an abusive relationship and was homeless, living in her car with her two children.  Once she got into a homeless shelter, she was encouraged to attend a community college, where I met her as part of the Women’s Mentoring Project.  She went on to earn her accounting degree at that 4-year college and is creating a better life for herself and her family.
That is what community college is all about.  Community colleges do not pick and choose their students; we work with all students to help them become who they aspire to be. 
As a teacher, I felt that I was in the right place at the right time to be part of an Administration that is committed to strengthening community colleges.  Five years ago, at the President’s request, I hosted the first-ever White House Summit on Community Colleges.  Thought leaders, educators, and policy makers gathered to discuss the increasing role community colleges play in educating America’s workforce.  Tom Sugar from Complete College America summarized it well, and I quote:
“Time, choice and structure are the essential optics through which all higher education reforms must be viewed in order to maximize the likelihood of graduating more of today’s students.” In other words, “…access without success is an empty promise.”
As Second Lady, I have traveled all across the country to see firsthand the transformative change that has occurred on college campuses to improve student success.  In fact, just last month, I visited two community colleges—Santa Fe College in Gainesville, Florida, and Austin Community College in Texas—both of which are using innovative strategies and technology to increase retention, completion and overall student success.
As a result, the completion rate for students at Santa Fe College is twenty percent higher than the national average.  And, students at Austin Community College are twice as likely to complete their developmental math course compared to a student enrolled in a traditional one.
These two schools are meeting students where they are, and guiding them to where they want to go.  They are also good examples of what makes community college so special—they have the flexibility, and innovation, to adapt and meet students’ needs. They truly are the community’s college.
I am proud to be part of an Administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system.  Earlier this year, the President announced his plan to make the first two years of community college free for all responsible students.  If you work hard, and maintain a good GPA, you should have access to the education you need. 
We believe all students—new and returning—should be able to graduate, ready for the new economy, without the burden of debt.  I’ve said it before, because I truly believe it—this is the moment for community colleges to shine.
The work that you are doing is so important in the lives of so many Americans—the students in your classroom, their children at home, and their community that is being lifted-up by having a well-educated and well-trained workforce.
I look forward to continue working with all of you to ensure education is accessible, affordable, and attainable for all Americans.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 18, 2015
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at the 2015 Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence Award Ceremony
Good afternoon, everyone.
Thank you, Ellen.  The work that you are doing to help more students succeed is making a difference.
Now, more than ever, Americans are relying on community colleges to provide the stepping stones to a college degree and a better future.  Our nation’s prosperity—strengthening the middle class—truly depends on our higher education system delivering more high-quality degrees to an increasingly diverse group of students.
Helping more students go to college, stay in school, and earn their diploma is vital to the future of our economy, because in the next five years—by 2020—two out of three job openings will require some form of higher education. That’s why I believe this is the moment for community colleges to shine, and the institutions that Aspen honors today are leading by example. 
Congratulations to all of the Aspen Prize finalists! These schools are reinventing what it means to be the community’s college.  They’re partnering with local employers to provide students with the skills they need to move into jobs that already exist in their communities. They’re creating clear-cut, affordable pathways for those who want to move on to a four-year university. They’re providing the flexibility that is needed for working parents to pursue their degree or obtain new skills.
The Aspen Prize gives us an opportunity to highlight the “best of the best,” to celebrate community colleges that are excelling, and to give all other schools the opportunity to consider adapting those best practices on their own campuses.  So, thank you to the Aspen Institute, the supporters, and the many people who worked so hard to get to this day.  You have helped these institutions get the recognition they so rightfully deserve.
Both in my classroom at NOVA, and when I am on the road visiting community colleges across the country, I am fortunate to see the tremendous impact community colleges have on so many students.
I see it in students like Erica, whom I met in Gainesville, Florida, last week.  As she told me, Erica almost dropped out of high school due to a bad relationship…with algebra.  As a mother of three, when Erica decided to go back to school, she found that the flexible class schedule, and the support and encouragement from the teachers and faculty at Santa Fe College, were exactly what she needed to succeed.  Not only did Erica pass her classes, but she thrived in the community college atmosphere.  She was a student ambassador and participated in the honors program.  After earning her degree from Santa Fe College, Erica is now enrolled at the University of Florida.
I see it in Christopher, a community college student whom I met at South-by-Southwest (SXSWedu) in Austin, Texas.  After high school, Christopher chose an out-of-state school that was more expensive than he could afford.  During his second year of college, even with his parents’ help, Christopher had to take out student loans and work two jobs to pay for tuition.  He knew something had to change. So, he moved closer to home and is attending Houston Community College where tuition is more affordable.  He’s now taking classes that support his dreams of going to business school, and has been accepted to Texas Tech for the fall semester.
I also see it in Jenny, a middle-aged mom of a newborn daughter.  Jenny works full time, mostly at night and on weekends so she can spend a few moments with her family between classes and work.  Her daughter was a big motivation for going back to school, but Jenny had math anxiety, and it was a stumbling block when she started thinking about all the math that she would have to do to get her degree.  Then, Jenny enrolled in Austin Community College’s innovative developmental math course, which takes place in lab the size of a football field, with over 600 computers, where students are allowed to work at their own pace, and have hands-on guidance from teachers—it has completely changed how Jenny looks at math.  In fact, she enjoys math so much that Jenny is looking to complete her degree and become a math teacher.
In reality, these are the typical community college students: mostly older, juggling work, school, and family.  That’s also what makes community colleges so special—they’re innovative and have the ability to adapt to the needs of all students, and put them on a path to reach their full potential. 
One day soon, community colleges will be free. As an educator, I am proud to be part of an Administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system.
I have worked with so many of you in this room: I gave my first commencement address at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn; El Paso Community College joined us at the first-ever White House Summit on Community Colleges; and, just two months ago, the President, Vice President and I joined Governor Haslam at Pellissippi State Community College in Tennessee where the President announced his proposal to make the first two years of community college free for responsible students.
I look forward to continue working with all of you in the months ahead to provide all students with the opportunity that they deserve to get a quality education.
We all have our own stories on why we are passionate about education.  I grew up in the sixties—I’m a sixties girl from Philly.  Before Joe, the men I dated wore jeans and clogs, and my hair was down past my waist, and some of theirs was too.  So, when a clean-cut Senator asked me out on a date, and showed up at my door wearing a suit and leather loafers, I wasn’t quite sure.  But what we found in one another was a shared sense of responsibility, and a passion to level the playing field.
Throughout his career in the Senate, and now as Vice President, my husband Joe has fought to lift up the middle class—to give all Americans a fair shot at the American Dream.
The same principle is the reason why I teach at a community college.  I teach because I believe education is the great equalizer.   Every day in my classroom I see the power of education to break down barriers, to open students’ eyes to the possibilities around them, and to provide them with opportunity to grow into the people they aspire to be.  You understand that better than anyone.   
Thank you again for all of your hard work, and congratulations.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 20, 2015
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at DREAM 2015
Good morning!  Thank you for that warm welcome!
I’d like to thank Robin, for that wonderful introduction.  I think she is the perfect example of why this convening and your work is so important.  Let’s give another round of applause for Robin—what an amazing student.
I also want to thank Achieving the Dream for inviting me to be part of this incredible effort to help more community college students succeed.   As a community college professor who was grading papers on the way up here this morning, your work is very close to my heart.
When the President and Vice President were first elected to the White House in 2008, I told my husband Joe that I would use my position as Second Lady to highlight the critical role of community colleges in creating the best, most-educated workforce in the world.  I also wanted to continue teaching full-time as well. So, one week after  , I was back in the classroom.  Because, teaching is not what I do; it is who I am.
I have been an educator for more than 30 years, and I have spent the last 20 years teaching at community colleges.  Every day in my classroom I see the power of education to break down barriers, and to open students’ eyes to the possibilities around them. I have students who attend classes on top of a full-time job.  I teach moms who are juggling jobs and child care while preparing for new careers.  I have many students working toward attending a four-year university.
Many of my students have doubts when they first arrive at college.  They are unsure of their future, unaware of the abilities they possess.  Then, two years later, those same students proudly accept their diplomas, knowing that they have achieved something that can never be taken away from them.  It’s a feeling you can get at most universities, but it’s especially strong at community colleges—where the gap between what is imagined at the beginning and what is achieved at the end can be so wide.
I can honestly say that my students are my heroes.  I am profoundly moved by their determination to learn, and their quest to make a better life for themselves and their families.  But, we all know that the responsibility for educating students is not the student’s alone.  It is a responsibility that belongs to all of us. 
As a lifelong educator, I am proud to be part of an administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system. 
In the depths of the recession, this administration saw higher education as critical to our plans to revitalize the American economy, and moved quickly to support students and their families.  We increased the dollar amount of Pell Grants as well as the number of students who qualify; increased tuition tax credits; let students cap their federal student loan payments at 10 percent of their income; and streamlined the financial aid process.  We have invested two billion dollars into over 1,000 colleges, to strengthen partnerships between community colleges and employers to create the next generation of skilled workers.
Just last year, the President and my husband Joe, the Vice President, launched an apprenticeship initiative—a partnership among community colleges and employers—to provide a career pathway for students and workers.  And, as you heard during the State of the Union, President Obama announced his plan to make two years of community college free for responsible students. 
Over the last six years, we have made real progress, but our work is nowhere near finished.  This administration will continue to make education a top priority because we believe all Americans deserve the opportunity to reach their full potential. 
But, I am not a politician.  I am an English professor.  At one time, I was also a college student.  I remember what it was like to go back to school while working and raising three children.  It wasn’t easy.   Even though it took me 15 years to earn two Master’s degrees and eventually my Doctorate, I kept at it because education is my passion.  That’s also one of the reasons why my dissertation focused on student retention in community colleges.
Currently, nearly half of the 18 million undergraduate students attend one of America’s Community Colleges.  Yet, less than half of students who attend a community college will either graduate or transfer to a four-year school within six years.
Helping more students go to college, stay in school and earn their diploma is vital to the future our economy—to ensuring our country has a thriving middle class—because by the end of this decade two-thirds of all job openings will require some form of higher education.
When I started teaching at Northern Virginia Community College, one of the things I wanted to do was help women who are returning to school.  So, I started the Women’s Mentoring Project, which pairs women who are over 30 with a faculty member. 
As part of the program, I helped one woman who was writing her scholarship essay for a four-year university.  Her path had not been easy.  She left an abusive relationship and was homeless, living in her car with her two kids.  Once she got into a homeless shelter, she was encouraged to attend a community college, where I met her as part of a women’s mentoring project.  She went on to a four-year university where she earned her accounting degree and is creating a better life for herself and her family.
That is what community college is all about.  Community colleges do not pick and choose their students; we work with students to help them become who they aspire to be.  Our Administration is committed to strengthening that mission and ensuring that the students who need help the most, receive the support they deserve.
As I have traveled around the country as Second Lady, I have seen firsthand that the leadership of faculty and administration at community colleges makes transformative change on their campuses to help improve outcomes for their students. 
I visited Delgado Community College in New Orleans a few years ago.  Like a lot of community colleges across America after the recession, Delgado saw a spike in their enrollment numbers because more and more students and workers were looking for an affordable way to pursue their degree or obtain new skills.
Unfortunately, at the time, Delgado was turning away students because they didn’t have the space to accommodate increased demand.  It was 5 years after Hurricane Katrina had devastated the region.  Many of their buildings had been underwater for weeks after the Hurricane, and they were still in no condition for students and faculty to use.
As the Chancellor said at the time, and I quote: “This is my 39th year in community colleges, and I never before turned away a student. Never.”
During my visit, I learned that Delgado was able to tailor its curriculum to the job opportunities in post-Katrina New Orleans, and they were investing more into a mentoring program for their female students—which accounted for 70 percent of the student body.
Like the mentoring program I started at NOVA, Delgado’s Women in Search of Excellence (WISE) program was providing their students with counseling services, workshops and an annual career and opportunity fair.  As a result, students were more likely to graduate.
Even after a Hurricane, the doors of the community college were open to help their people recover, rebuild, and grow into careers they love.  That’s what’s so special about community colleges—they have the ability to partner with local employers to provide new skills training, work to make sure classes are flexible for working families, and provide an affordable path for those who want to move on to a four-year university.
As President John F. Kennedy, said,  “Let us think of education as the means of developing our greatest abilities, because in each of us there is a private hope and dream which, fulfilled, can be translated into benefit for everyone and greater strength for our nation.”
We all reap the benefits when our citizens are well-educated and well-trained.  It means that our economies are more vibrant, and our future is brighter.  That’s why the work that you are doing is so important.  We need you to keep making your voices heard, and to bring others into the fold.
Over the next few months, the administration is going to build a coalition of elected officials, business and higher education leaders, philanthropists, and students like those of you here today to support our efforts to strengthen community colleges. Because higher education should be accessible, affordable, and attainable for all American families.
As I like to say, this is the moment for community colleges to shine.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 11, 2015
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at the 2015 Community College National Legislative Summit
Community colleges have entered a new day in America.  As an educator, I am proud to be part of an administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system.
In the depths of the recession, this administration saw higher education as critical to our plans to revitalize the American economy, and moved quickly to support students and their families.  In the first few months in office, we increased the dollar amount of Pell Grants as well as the number of students who qualify; increased tuition tax credits; let students cap their federal student loan payments at 10 percent of their income; and streamlined the financial aid process. 
Since then, we have invested two billion dollars into 700 colleges, to strengthen partnerships between community colleges and employers to create the next generation of skilled workers.  In fact, tomorrow, my husband Joe, the Vice President, will be in Iowa at Des Moines Area Community College to highlight the importance of helping more Americans go to college and the critical role that partnerships between community colleges and employers can play in helping Americans obtain the skills they need to succeed in the workforce.
Last year, Joe launched an apprenticeship initiative—a partnership among community colleges and employers—to provide a career pathway for workers, setting them on an upward trajectory for life.  In January, Joe and I traveled to Knoxville with President Obama where he announced his America’s College Promise proposal—to make two years of community college free for responsible students. 
This administration recognizes the value of community colleges, and in investing in them.  We believe they are vital to the future of our country, because by the end of this decade two-thirds of all job openings will require some form of higher education.  Currently, nearly half of all undergraduate students attend community colleges.
For the past six years, we have worked to highlight the importance of community colleges to America’s future.  At the President’s request, I hosted the first-ever White House Summit on Community Colleges in 2010, and over the past few years we’ve seen the leadership of faculty and administration at community colleges across the country make transformative change on their campuses to help improve outcomes for their students.  
I have travelled across the country, from Seattle to Miami, and from Texas to New York, visiting over 60 of your campuses to see firsthand how community colleges are able to increase employment opportunities for students and workers.  I met many of you during my Community College to Career bus tour. 
At one of the stops, I visited Wytheville Community College in rural Virginia.  The school serves as a hub for workforce training, and helps to meet the needs of one the largest employers in the region: Gatorade.  I met students and workers, including women in their forties, who were able to go back to school and recast themselves for good-paying, middle-class jobs at the Gatorade plant.  Wytheville had gone through an incredible revitalization in large part due to the flexibility of its community college. 
This story replicates itself time and time again across this nation.  That’s what's so special about community colleges.  They open the doors for so many Americans, new and returning students, to enter the middle class and are foundational to strengthening state and local economies.  As Horace Mann said, “Education then, beyond all other devices of human origin, is the great equalizer.”
We all have our own stories on why we are passionate about education.  For me, it is my grandmother.  She taught at an old-fashioned, one-room schoolhouse where three grades of students were piled into one classroom.  My grandmother would take me with her to school and used to let me ring the brass school bell to call her students to class.  I still have that bell. 
It was my grandmother who developed my love of reading.  She read to me all the time, so I grew up loving to read.  When I was in college, I realized that so many kids could not read or did not love to read the way I did.  That is when I decided I was going to become a reading specialist.  I wanted to share and teach that love of reading, like my grandmother did with me.
So, after I earned my Master’s degree in remedial reading, I began teaching as a reading specialist in public high schools.  From there, I taught English at a psychiatric hospital for adolescents, and I continue to teach English as a full-time professor at a community college in Northern Virginia.  In fact, I will be back in my classroom tomorrow morning.  I have been an educator for more than 30 years, and I have spent the last 20 years teaching at community colleges. 
In 2008, after the President and Vice President were first elected to the White House, I told Joe that not only would I use my position as Second Lady to highlight the critical role of community colleges in creating the best, most-educated workforce in the world, but I would continue teaching as well.  So, one week after  , I was back in the classroom.  Because, teaching is not what I do; it is who I am.
Teaching is my life’s work.  I teach because I love seeing the difference that I hope to make in my students lives.  My goal is to always give them confidence in their own abilities, because I know confidence will carry them well beyond my classroom in whatever they do. 
As I work hard every day to inspire my students, it is ultimately they who inspire me.  Every day in my classroom I see the power of education to break down barriers and to open students’ eyes to the possibilities around them. 
In my classes, I find single parents who come to school in the evening, weary from a long day, yet eager to create a brighter future for their children.  I have taught veterans who return to the classroom to complete their higher education as they look to transition to civilian careers.  I have seen workers, who have gone as far as they can in their jobs, get the skills they need to reach the next level.
I see it over and over again because the students are so committed to furthering their education.  I can honestly say that my students are my heroes.  I am profoundly moved by their determination to learn, and their quest to make a better life for themselves and their families. 
I know that many of you have also seen students transformed by new ideas.  But, as important as these individual success stories are, we all know that the responsibility for educating students is not the student’s alone.  It is a responsibility that belongs to all of us. 
Community colleges are uniquely positioned to fulfill this responsibility—to meet the needs of the actual community where they live—whether that means partnering with local employers on credentialing, working to make sure classes are flexible for working families, or supporting a seamless transition to a four-year degree.  Because, we all reap the benefits when our citizens are well-educated and well-trained.  It means that our economies are more vibrant, and our future is brighter.
You understand that better than anyone.  Which is why we need you.  As you heard, during the State of the Union, President Obama has big plans for community colleges and this administration needs you to keep making your voices heard, and to bring others into the fold.
Over the next few months, the administration is going to build a coalition of elected officials, business leaders, philanthropists and, most importantly, higher education leaders like all of you to support our efforts to strengthen community colleges, because all Americans deserve the opportunity to reach their full potential. 
On behalf of the President, First Lady Michelle Obama, and my husband Joe, thank you for your leadership, and for your continued partnership.
This is the moment for community colleges to shine.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 26, 2015
Remarks by Vice President Biden on the Caribbean Energy Security Initiative
State Department
Washington, D.C. 
2:33 P.M. EST
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. Prime Minister, it’s a pleasure to be with you.  And, Fred, the Atlantic Council has done an incredible job, and you're continued focus and commitment matters and forces everyone else to focus.  And, Mack McLarty, an old, old friend, the Council of the Americas has been your -- how can I say it -- your passion for a long time.  And it’s very much appreciated.
Presidents, Prime Ministers, representatives from the international community, the private sector, and -- if you excuse, as we used to say when I was a senator, a point of personal privilege, Adrienne Arsht.  Where are you, Adrienne?  She is -- there you go.  This woman is a fellow Delawarean.  We grew up together.  She was seven; I was 21.  (Laughter.)  And she is following in the footsteps of her incredible parents in all the incredibly good things you've been doing, not the least of which is this Latin American Center you've set up.  Thank you, Adrienne.
As Fred said, this is not the first time we’ve gathered to discuss energy security.  And for years it’s sort of been the same story.  But I want to make a point at the outset here that is different.  I have been given -- how can I say it -- the authority to move this issue for us, but the President of the United States -- President Obama -- has made it absolutely clear that both the Caribbean and Central America energy and security are, in fact, primary issues for us.
My dad used to have an expression.  He said, if everything is equally important to you, nothing is important to you.  This is extremely important to us.  It’s overwhelmingly in the interest of the United States of America that we get it right, and that this relationship changes for the better across the board.  So I want you to know that the combination of those two issues is -- are paramount issues with us, equal to anything else we are doing around the world.  And we are engaged a great deal, as you know.
And this is also a very propitious moment.  I was mentioning this to the Prime Minister.  The vice president of the IMF is here.  And the IMF has made projections about growth in GDP around the world.  And the United States is projected to be one of those areas of the world that is going to grow, and grow significantly at 3.5 percent or more.
The reason I say that is the combination of that, plus low oil prices, plus the plummeting costs of renewable energy gives us a moment, a window here where we will get significant support from the American public because we are doing better to invest more overseas and overseas is just across the water into the Caribbean.  We are in a position that I think we should understand there’s a sense of urgency that we take advantage of the opportunities.  We had great discussions downstairs, and you're going to have more here before we leave.
The fact is for years it has been the same.  Economies squeezed by the high cost, making companies less competitive, crowding out other investments in the future of your countries; citizens in your countries demanding more affordable supply; expressing their discontent when they hear about investments they don't seem to see any results in; governments dependent on a single, increasingly unreliable, external supplier. Not just here, but in Europe and other parts of the world, as well.
And whether it’s the Ukraine or the Caribbean, no country should be able to use natural resources as a tool of coercion against any other country.
Energy developers come to your door with exciting ideas.  But somehow deals fall apart when it comes to finding the financing.  Many of you feel you can’t tolerate the rise in energy prices, given the little space you have to make reforms you know you need to make.  But this is an opportunity.
That's been the story, but it doesn't need to remain that way.  Ladies and gentlemen, when it comes to energy, we’re living in a new moment –- not just in the Caribbean, but worldwide. 
Sometimes it took -- I can recall when I was a younger senator and we’d talk about the Information Age.  By the time we’d caught up to the Information Age, it had already passed government.  It had already moved well beyond.
You can talk about that in every state.  The question is, how do governments keep up with fundamental changes that are taking place in the world?  So it’s up to us to seize this moment and seize it together because a great deal has changed.
Let’s start with oil prices, now under $50 a barrel.  This gives governments a little space to breathe, and it’s likely it’s going to remain relatively low for at least the near term, the next several years.  There’s an old saying:  The best time to fix a roof is when the sun is shining.  The best time to fix a roof is when the sun is shining.  The sun is shining now figuratively speaking.  The time is now.
Renewable energy is affordable.  We heard discussions downstairs just how radically the cost has been reduced for renewable energy and how it is producing competitive per-kilowatt hours. 
The cost of developing wind and solar energy has fallen by 50 percent just in the last four years.  We’re starting to see those technologies outcompete real coal, oil-fired generation in places like Brazil without any subsidies at all.
We have technologies in natural gas that are moving forward.  And we shouldn’t expect this to be a panacea for everyone, but it’s also true there are more options at your disposal now for natural gas delivery than there have ever been -— from small-scale barge trades of LNG, to floating import terminals.  And they're not just -- these aren’t just designs on paper.  They exist.  They operate.
You can now purchase gas on the open market from many countries, including your neighbor, Trinidad and Tobago right now.  There’s also LNG exporters in the United States with licenses to export to any of your countries, whether you have a free trade agreement or not.  If you want gas, go talk to them. 
Meanwhile, we’re in the midst of a seismic shift in the global economy:  the ascendancy of the Americas as the epicenter of energy production in the world.  We have more oil and gas rigs running in the United States, than all the rest of the world combined.  Mexico, Canada and the United States is the new epicenter of energy -- not the Arabian Peninsula.  It is the new epicenter of energy in the 21st century. 
An integrated North America, working to promote energy security beyond our borders can be a major asset for the entire hemisphere.  And it’s profoundly in the self-interest of the United States to see the Caribbean countries succeed as prosperous, secure, energy-independent neighbors -— not a world apart, but an integral part of the hemisphere, where every nation is middle class, democratic and secure.  It’s the first time in history that can be envisioned.  You can see it if we make the right decisions.
So taken together, these changes create a moment of energy opportunity that hasn’t existed.  Progress is possible.  And it’s possible to begin now -- not a decade from now, but now.  And that’s what we’ve discussed in our meetings today.  You can set up an electric sector that uses geothermal energy, hydropower, and other sources to give the system stability. 
You can max out your use of renewable energy resources like wind, solar, and biomass, diversifying your supply, keeping your foreign reserves in the bank where you need them.  You can leverage energy efficiency in every sector, shrinking the amount of energy you need to keep your economy humming.
Some people out there think that it can’t be done in the Caribbean.  They’re dead wrong.  They are dead wrong.  Not only can it be done, it is being done right now with some of your neighbors. 
Look at what the U.S. Virgin Islands are doing:  They’re combining renewable energy with propane to lower costs, and secure their supply, saving ratepayers 30 percent on electric bill, while at the same time reducing greenhouse gas emissions
from the fossil fleet by 12 percent.
Solar photovoltaic facilities at the -- at the Cyril E. King Airport that the Port Authority is saving nearly $1,000 a day.  That’s real money.
Aruba, which united its government, the utilities, and businesses behind a common strategy and action plan, has now brought enough renewable energy online to satisfy 30 percent of their demand, and may even reach 40 percent by the end of this year.  That’s demonstrable progress.  It’s happening now.
St. Lucia is breaking down the barriers to develop new investments in geothermal energy and is creating new legislation to create a national regulatory body for energy to stabilize the rules of the game and make investments more attractive to those of you who are energy suppliers here in the room.
Barbados has long been the leader in solar technology, and is poised to make major new investments in renewables.
Progress is practical, it is possible, and it is profitable.   Significant improvements are within reach for just about every one of your countries.  And as I said before, not a decade away.  Now.  Right now. If, and it’s a big if, you can summon within your systems the political will to seize the promise of this new moment. 
Because, as we learned, real and lasting progress toward energy security everywhere in the world depends more than just on spending money.   Because over the last 10 years, tens of millions of dollars have been pledged and invested.  But we don’t have nearly enough to show for it.
So it can’t just be about money.  It has to be about doing business the right way.  Government money and targeted international aid can and must be available -- is helpful, but the private sector is where the money is.
That’s why the primary goal of this summit isn’t to put up another solar panel, or sign another gas contract.  It’s to help you create the conditions where your countries can attract private-sector investment.  And it’s there.  They're ready.  From hedge funds to private energy companies.  This may not be easy, but it’s also not a mystery how it works.  The geography may be different.  The size and scales of each of your countries may vary.  But there are certain core ingredients that remain the recipe for success moving toward energy independence.
First and foremost, you have to deal with corruption.  You need to be choosing projects because they’re the most competitive -— not for other reasons.  You need update and modernize not just the physical infrastructure, but your institutions and regulations.  Rules need to be clear, transparent, and fair.  Many of you are already doing that and way ahead of the curve.
Enforcement needs to be predictable under the rule of law.  Courts need to adjudicate disputes fairly.  You can’t bankrupt yourself on subsidies.  Utilities need to be financially viable.  It helps if you can harmonize your regulatory frameworks -– so that businesses can look to invest in an entire region, rather than just in a single country -- trying to navigate the unique regulations of every country in the region.
We need to talk to the stakeholders, from utilities, to generators, to consumers, to articulate a common vision and create a system that works to realize that vision.
We need to have the political will to take on entrenched interests, to better serve our people.  Some of you have been told differently.  You’ve been promised easy solutions over the years.  But if there were easy solutions and fixes, there would have already been found by now. 
We’ve learned that the countries that fare the best are those willing to roll up their sleeves and put everything on the table.  They take a determined and holistic approach, with an eye to the long-term.  And they make it a paramount priority to attract private investment.  This is not either-or.  It’s all of the above -- concessional loans, international development banks, private sector.  All the above.
And I can promise you this:  If you commit -- and I believe you all are committing -- to these goals, to this process, all of us here will work to support you.   We’re prepared.  I guarantee you we will do our part.  And we can afford it.  But we’re not going to waste money.  We’re going to insist on
considerably more transparency, greater coordination, and changes in the regulations.
We’re not here to replace one flawed financing scheme with another.  The United States and the international community
can and will do -- and we’ll be involved.  We can help.  We can make it less difficult but necessary steps take a quantum leap toward energy security -- the necessary steps that I’ve referenced and others.
And there’s a lot we can do –- some of which I spoke about in June in the Dominican Republic.  In some cases, we can help provide financing.  The U.S. government is in the process of establishing a team, a beefed-up team of Overseas Private Investment Corporation, known as OPIC, devoted entirely to the Caribbean.  In the past most of our effort has been developing in other parts of the world.  But this new focus, we have taken on in a shorthanded agency, an entirely new team to ensure that we focus on the Caribbean, to ensure projects can be connected to financing.
And today, OPIC will disburse its first installment, $90 million, for 34 Mega-Watt wind project by Blue Mountain Renewables in Jamaica.  When construction begins in June, it will be a tangible example of what can be achieved when the public and private sector in both countries work together to meet this challenge and meet it head on.
The United States and the international community can also provide technical assistance to help countries attract investment in your energy sectors.   USAID announced a $10 million program to supply energy investments in Jamaica; the U.S. Trade and Development Agency has announced three new grants to support clean energy in the Dominican Republic.  We’re also looking at similar projects in other parts of the region.
We can help.  We can help you build a more comprehensive model as we are working to do so -- and we're doing that as I speak, we're doing it with the government of Grenada.  This is an effort to show what is possible.  We’re willing to work with all of you.  But we have to be focused.  We can help come -- we can help convene all of us around the table to discuss and coordinate more effectively -- as I promised to do last summer, and as we are doing today, and we’ll move on beyond today.
I’ve spoken at length about what success requires from you. 
Let me speak about how, the United States and the donor countries, need to change the way we do business, as well.
We all want to invest in this new future in the Caribbean. 
Everyone is well-intentioned.  I know it’s easier in the short run to go out and cherry pick, to do a series of one-off projects.  But to be effective over the longer term, that has to change.
We donors and investors need to talk to one another.  It’s important that international financial institutions are more coordinated and more focused.  We need one central fora to make sure our various efforts are aligned and achieve maximum impact in the region.  That's our responsibility.  We have not done that thus far for you.
I promised last summer that we’d work within the international financial institutions and with others to do a better job in this coordination.  The goal of this meeting today is to walk away with an agreement to create a coordinating mechanism that will maximize energy programs in the region.  We support the World Bank’s proposal to create this and we hope you’ll join us in offering your support, as well.
These countries’ and institutions’ presence here at this meeting is encouraging -- an encouraging sign.  Now it’s important that we back up all we’ve talked about with some real, genuine action.  Because imagine what will happen if, together, we finally get this right.
You, the countries of the Caribbean, have a chance at the supply of energy that’s more resilient, more sustainable, cleaner, more affordable than you have ever, ever had.
You have a chance to reduce the number of oil spills, protect your waters, put the money you are saving into schools, hospitals, jobs, infrastructure, and manufacturing.  You have a chance to harness the natural wealth of your countries; to find and fuel your economies and save your people money; free up your government budgets and without the burden of insecure supplies of energy; to expand what is possible for the citizens of the Caribbean in the century ahead.
A lot of work lies ahead.  I’m not Pollyannaish about this.  I know there’s a lot of work.   But we have a chance.
And I’d like to conclude in the words with -- I was kidding my colleagues earlier today about Irish poets.  And my good friend from Trinidad and Tobago said, you know we have a Nobel laureate.  I’m going to send you his poems.  But there’s an Irish poet Seamus Heaney.  He wrote a poem called “The Cure at Troy.”  And there’s a paragraph -- there’s a stanza in that poem that applies to where I think we all find ourselves today.  He said:
History teaches us don’t hope
on this side of the grave,
but then once in a lifetime,
the longed-for tidal wave of justice can rise up,
and hope and history rhyme.
We’ve got a chance.  We got a chance to make hope and history rhyme here in terms of your economies.  And the single-biggest burden that could be lifted from you right now, economically, is the cost of energy and the dependence that you still have on single suppliers.  That's what we can do.  It can change everything.
And I know all of you I met with today are competent, committed leaders in your country.  You all have the interests of your people at heart.  We share your desire.  We're going to try our best to be the best partner we can possibly be in order to have you reach the objective that is within your reach, energy independence in the Caribbean.
So I thank you all for making the trip here.  I’ll close where I began our early morning meeting.  This meeting was planned for Miami.  But it’s all the fault of Colombia that we're not there.  (Laughter.)  And I want to explain why. The Miss Universe Pageant took place -- (laughter) -- seriously, and all the rooms were taken up.  That's because I guess the Colombians knew they were going to beat the American and end up with the runner-up being an American and Miss Universe being Miss Colombia.  So I understand that.  I understand that.  (Laughter.)  But that's the reason you're in the snow.  That's the reason you're in the snow.  (Laughter.)
Thanks for making the effort to be here.  Love you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
2:55 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 27, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Biden at a Service for NYPD Officer Rafael Ramos
Christ Tabernacle
Glendale, New York
10:18 A.M. EST
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Governor Cuomo, Mayor de Blasio, Commissioner Bratton, Pastor, thank you for allowing me to be here today and according me the privilege of expressing the condolences of Jill and my whole family to the Ramos family.  What handsome boys. 
I remember a similar occasion a long time ago.  And, Mom, I assure you those boys will get you through all of this.
I’m sure I speak for the whole nation, Maritza, when I say to you that our hearts ache for you.  I know from personal experience that there is little anyone can say or do at this moment to ease the pain, that sense of loss, that sense of loneliness. 
But I do hope you take some solace from the fact that as reported by the press there’s over 25,000 members of the same fraternity and sorority as your husband who stand and will stand with you the rest of your life -- and they will.  It’s an uncommon fraternity.
Justin, and Jayden, you’ve shown tremendous courage and character in these past few days.  You are your father’s sons.  And he was so, so very proud of you from everything that I have heard.  And just know, as hard as it is to believe, he will be part of your life the entirety of your life.
Mom, no child should predecease a parent.  My heart aches for you.
And, Maritza, I know from experience there are no words that I can offer to ease that profound sense of loneliness and loss you’re feeling right now.
But I also know from experience that the time will come -- the time will come when Rafael’s memory will bring a smile to your lips before it brings a tear to your eyes.  That’s when you know it’s going to be okay.  I know it’s hard to believe it will happen, but I promise you it will happen.  And my prayer for you is it will come sooner rather than later.
There’s a headstone in Ireland that reads:
Death leaves a heartache no one can heal.
Love leaves a memory that no one can steal.
Just sitting here for a few moments looking at the screens, no one had to know your husband to not know how desperately he cared about his family, how close he was to all of you.
I didn’t know your husband and I didn't know his partner, who were keeping watch at Myrtle and Tompkins Avenue on that terrible afternoon, but I do know why they were there.  They were there to protect and defend, as they always are.  Sometimes fearful, but always watchful.
I knew them.  They’re the guy I grew up with in Scranton and Claymont, Delaware, the boy with the most courage and the most compassion; the man with a brave heart and a generous soul; a brother who always looked out for his sister; a father whose words were always encouraging to you boys with a touch that could soothe away the fear; and a son who made his mother proud every time he turned and smiled at her; and a husband with a gentle hand who could soothe away the concerns, who you knew would always be there.
A former school safety officer, who became a cop at age 37; an active member of his church, studying to become a chaplain; a father, a husband, a son; a seven-year veteran on the force.  A son of a Chinese immigrant, his partner, conversant in several dialects; a newlywed.  Both -- confident, committed, passionate and vigilant.
Being a cop was not what they did, it was who they were; like every man and woman in uniform here today.  It’s who you are.  And they like every one of you in uniform inside this church and outside, you all joined for essentially the same reason.  There was something about you that made you think you could help, that you should serve, that you had a duty.
I have spoken at too many funerals for too many peace officers, too many funerals for brave women and men who kept us safe and watched their families grieve.  And I’ve observed one thing that unfortunately, it’s only when a tragedy like this occurs that all their friends, neighbors, and people who didn't even know them become of aware of and reminded of the sacrifices they make every single, solitary day to make our lives better.
Today we pay tribute to Officer Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu.  We pay tribute to their families.  Because every day when a police officer pins on that shield and walks out the door, the officer’s wife, husband, mother, father, brother, sister, children -- they know anything could happen.  The fear of that call at 3:00 a.m. in the morning, the relief of hearing the voice of the door opened, says, I’m home.
There’s a line from the English poet, John Milton.  He said, “They also serve who only stand and wait.”  Thousands upon thousands upon thousands of American families stand and wait so their husbands and wives, fathers and sons can serve the rest of us.  Police officers and police families are a different breed –- thank God for them.  Thank God for them.
And your husband, Maritza, and his partner, they were a part of New York’s Finest.  And that's not an idle phrase.  This is probably the finest police department in the world -- the finest police department in the world.  They earn that praise.  (Applause.)
It’s a sacred trust they took on when they kiss their children’s forehead as they sleep, and head out on a night shift to watch over all of the children of this great city, treating and protecting each of them as if they were their own.
When you patrol the streets of New York, you circle the Earth; a six-story walk-up, apartment towers, aromas of a million kitchens continuing thousands of traditions; streets full of silence, streets bursting with hundreds languages -– whispering.  Laughing.  Shouting.
An intimidating city.  A city of others.  A city of labels and borders and seemingly unbridgeable gaps, a city constantly grappling with issues as old as the nation and as new as the morning headlines.
Yet in every neighborhood in this great city, this most alive of all cities, this chaotic miracle stands as a beacon to the world in no small part because of the sacrifices that the New York Police Department makes every single day.
So when an assassin’s bullet targeted two officers, it targeted this city and it touched the soul of the entire nation -- a city where the son of a Chinese immigrant shared a patrol with a Hispanic minister in training; a city where a single ride on a subway brings you into contact with more people, more lives than many people in this country will encounter in an entire lifetime; a city that educated a young college student with a mother from Kansas, and a father from Kenya who would one day stand before the nation and declare:  This is not a black America or a white America or a Latino America or an Asian America; this is the United States of America.  (Applause.)
And for those of us who are not New Yorkers, we look at you in awe because this is the united city of New York as well; a city that rose as one to confront two of the greatest disasters of this century -- one from the evils of terrorism on 9/11 and one from the fury of nature in Superstorm Sandy.
This is a city of courage and character, having faced and overcome the toughest challenges and I’m absolutely confident as you are that spirit is still alive and well in this city.  And I’m absolutely confident it will guide you in the days and weeks ahead. 
I believe that this great police force, and this incredibly diverse city can and will show the nation how to bridge any divide.  You’ve done it before.  And you will do it again.  Because, to paraphrase the words of William Allen White, you are not afraid of tomorrow, because you’ve seen yesterday and because you love today.
To the Ramos family, we were all lucky to have Rafael.  He didn’t just have a bible in his locker, he lived it in his heart.  He was a cop for all the right reasons.
Mom, we owe you for nurturing him.  And, Maritza, we owe you for supporting him.  And, Justin and Jayden, know that although your father is gone, you have inherited an entire family, the men and women of the New York Police Department will always be there as long as you are alive.  They never -- they never -- never forget.
There’s a communion hymn in my church that has a stanza that goes like this:
May he raise you up on eagle’s wings
And bear you on the breath of dawn.
And make the sun to shine on you.
That’s what your father wished for, for both you boys.  That's what your father wished for, for this city.  And it will happen. 
May God bless your family and the family of his partner and may God protect the 84th Precinct and every police officer throughout this great country and keep them safe while they stand on watch for us.  God bless you all.  (Applause.)
END
10:32 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 07, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to the 2014 Saban Forum
The Willard Hotel
Washington, D.C.
  1:10 P.M. EST
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much.  We're a few minutes late because I was in the back with Haim.  I was interviewing for a place on one of his many networks he owns.  So I don't know how I did, but we’ll talk about it later.
Look, folks, it’s a delight to be here.  And, Joe, it’s a delight to see you.  I haven’t seen Joe Lieberman in such a long time, and, Hadassah.  Joe’s chair in the Senate, seat in the Senate was directly in front of mine for a number of years when Joe was there.  And every time Joe would get up to speak, I’d whisper in his ear, say it ain’t so, Joe.  (Laughter.)  Say it ain’t so.  It’s good to see you, Joe.
And, Nita, it’s good to see you.  I shouldn’t probably do this -- Robert Wexler is here I’m told, an old, old buddy.  And I see Sandy.  It’s hard to see in this light.  And Dan Shapiro.  There are so many good friends that are here.
Before I begin, I’d like to say a brief word about the failed rescue mission that occurred yesterday.  As, with all of you I’m sure,  our prayers are with the families of Luke Somers, who was murdered yesterday by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
We, [and] the intelligence community worked very, very hard and relentlessly with the government to try to figure out how we could rescue Luke, who was a photo-journalist. Like Dan Pearl and Steven Sotloff and James Foley, and so many other brave women and men who’ve traveled from the safety of this country into harm’s way to tell the stories of the lives of others faraway- a noble mission. 
The truth of the matter is since the conflict really began involving us in almost over 10 years, the percentage of journalists and Foreign Service officers who’ve been killed is almost as high on a percentage basis as some of our military missions.
And to state the obvious, the women and men who -- of the Special Forces, who were engaged in these two rescue missions did an incredible job and inflicted serious damage on the captors.  But this time they were unable to save Luke.
But I think that we should also note, the President and I are grateful to the Yemeni government for their cooperation in these efforts to fight the terrorists. 
We can only -- I’ll speak for myself, I can only imagine how Luke’s parents feel today.  Murdered in the second attempt, came so close.  This is a despicable crime.  And we mean what we say when we say from -- speaking for the intelligence community, the military, the government as a whole, we will be relentless in our efforts to bring to justice those who have caused -- some already have been brought to justice in the raid.  But there’s much more to do.  It’s a tragic reminder of the violence we face in the Middle East and a potent reminder of what Israelis face every day.
Haim, members of the Israeli Cabinet, Cabinet ministers, party leaders, old friends, members of the diplomatic corps, it’s a pleasure to look out and see so many old faces, people I’ve worked with -- and I hate to admit this -- for over 40 years to make good on our commitment to guarantee a secure nation-state of Israel that is secure, survivable and is -- I’ve said before, if there weren’t an Israel, we’d have to invent one.  If there weren’t an Israel -- we always talk about Israel from this perspective as if we're doing some favor.  We are meeting a moral obligation, but it’s so much more than a moral obligation.   It’s overwhelmingly in the self-interest of the United States of America to have a secure, democratic friend, a strategic partner like Israel.  As I said, it’s no favor.  It’s an obligation, but it’s also a strategic necessity. 
Israel today is the strongest nation in the Middle East.  But it bothers me sometimes -- I remember when I first got here as a kid, a 29-year-old kid, Israel was very much looked upon by the rest of the world as being somewhat fragile, sitting on the banks of the Mediterranean with millions of Arabs looking at them and wanting to see them gone, et cetera. 
And as the Israelis themselves and the United States helping build Israel into the physically capable power that it is today, there seems to be a mindset that's changed in some parts of the world, that somehow there isn’t still -- Israel is still not under siege.  Just because it’s strong, just because it’s vibrant, just because it is physically capable does not mean that it’s not under siege.  Be it that mother who every day opens the door and puts their child on a bus to go school, be it that father who has -- it amazes me how quickly people’s memories fade about how vulnerable individuals within that country—and the country—remains because of the nature of the arrayed forces against it.
Rockets from the southern frontier; Hezbollah in the north; Nusrah and ISIL on the north and east;  And across the region; a demographic wave that is gigantic; a sectarian conflict that is reminiscent of predictions of -- 700 years ago of a Sunni-Shia war; a profound political, society upheaval; more profound than any upheaval that's occurred in the region in a century. 
And looming over everything is Iran and its nuclear program -- the long and dangerous reach of its regional ambitions is felt not just by Israel, but by everyone else in the neighborhood.  And it’s a really tough, tough neighborhood.  I know that's the biggest understatement anyone has said to you today because all of you know it, feel it, taste it and have experienced it.
And it requires uncommon courage.  And the uncommon courage is that displayed by the people of Israel.  From the outset, they’ve lived under siege -- from the outset.  And more recently, they’ve lived in daily defiance of rockets, terrorist tunnels, unconscionable acts of terrorism like this month’s attack -- last month’s attack on a synagogue that took the lives of Jews at prayers, including three Americans, as well as a brave Israeli police officer. 
But for Israel, this tough neighborhood is home.  This tough neighborhood is where they live and will live forever.
I recently heard a story about Chaim Weizmann, who, as we all know was the first Prime Minister [sic].  I’m told he was lobbying the British House of Lords to establish a State of Israel when he was asked pointedly:  Why do you Jews insist on Palestine when there are so many underdeveloped countries you could settle in conveniently? 
And Weizmann’s reply was, that’s like my asking why you drove 20 miles to visit your mother last Sunday when there were so many nice old ladies on your own street.  (Laughter.)  Pretty apt.  Pretty apt.
My father said it a different way.  Joe knew my dad.  Joe was the first guy that told me that -- my dad would be referred to as a righteous Christian because at my dad’s dinner table -- it was a place where we sat to have conversation, and incidentally eat.  And my dad couldn’t understand -- when I was a kid in grade school and then in high school, he couldn’t understand when I was in grade school why there was even a debate about whether or not the State of Israel should be established.  And it totally perplexed him that even in the Jewish community in the United States there was some debate.  For he believed and -- which all of you do, I hope -- that the only ultimate guarantor of the security of the Jewish people worldwide in the face of such tragedy and history, the only way to ensure that phrase that became so prevalent after World War II, “never again,” was that for it to make a difference, there was only one place in the world that could be secure -- guaranteed -- and that is a State of Israel for the Jewish people.
I remember saying to my dad, but Dad, here in America… He said, pray God, Joey, that will always be the case.  And then he went through and told me the history of what happened and when it was so certain the Jews in Germany and in Spain and other places were part of the fabric of the society, et cetera.
Well, there’s never been any doubt in my mind.  There’s never been any doubt--though I want you to know, because I know some of you importune me not infrequently -- there’s no doubt in President Obama’s mind either, that we have an obligation to match the steel and the spine of the people of Israel with an ironclad, nonnegotiable commitment to Israel’s physical security.
And that's why we’ve invested over $1 billion -- and I know I’m going to repeat myself here, of some things you've already heard and said and you know, but it’s worthy for the press to hear it -- $1 billion in the production and development of Iron Dome batteries and interceptors -— including almost a quarter of a billion dollars in emergency funding this summer.  
As those rockets rained down and terrorists tunnels in from Gaza appeared, President Obama steadfastly stood before the world and defended Israel’s right to defend itself -— by itself —- like any other nation. 
Earlier this year, he backed up that commitment once again by securing over $3 billion in foreign military financing.  This is the largest amount of U.S. security assistance for Israel in all of history; over $17 billion since we took office, $8.5 million a day.
Prime Minister Netanyahu has, as Minister Livni knows, has been my friend for over 30 years.  We drive each other crazy.  But he has truly been a personal friend for well over 30 years.  He acknowledged this.  I was with him when he acknowledged it in front of the President, and he said it subsequently that this administration’s support to Israel’s security is “unprecedented.”
The President and I have now met with the Prime Minister more than any world leader.  Just last month, we held the U.S.-Israeli Consultative Group at the White House -— a regular gathering of defense, diplomatic, and intelligence leaders of both countries.  It features some of the most candid, strategic conversations we have with any nation -- especially with regard to Iran.
Again, I’m importuned because I speak all over the country and I’m going to say something outrageous, I have long, long ties with the American Jewish community.  And I get asked questions that perplex me.  About, does the President really mean it?  I get asked questions, do you mean what you say about Iran?  Look, I get asked questions, does Israel know what you're doing?  Ask any of our Israeli friends here.  They have been in every jot and tittle of everything we’ve thought about as it relates to engaging Iran from the very beginning.
Look, we’re close friends -- the American people, the Israeli people, our governments.  There’s absolutely no daylight -- none -- between us and the Israelis on the question of Israel’s security.  But as friends, we have an obligation to speak honestly with one another; to talk about -– not avoid -— the tactical disagreements we have, and we have tactical disagreements; to lay out for one another each of our perspectives.
I know none of you have ever -- I assume none of you have ever doubted I’ve meant whatever I have said to you.  The problem is I sometime say all that I think to you. 
We have been in constant, unrelenting contact with our friends in Israel and continue to do so; just as Israel has been absolutely candid with us when we have -- when they have tactical differences.  That's what friends do because we have no difference in our strategic perspectives.
And by the way folks, I say to my Israeli friends and to all of you who know Israel as well as I do -- and you all do -- that you can hear the same discussions in the Israeli parliament, the same differences.  You can hear the same discussions in synagogues in Israel.  You can hear the same discussions in cafes in Israel, the same differences that our governments discuss -- mostly privately. 
But I urge -- and you are the most influential group that could be assembled in one room in this country on the U.S.-Israeli relationship -- let’s not make more of what are normal disagreements that occur between friends than warrants.
Israel disagrees with us on a number of our tactics.  They have a different perspectives on how to proceed.  But, folks, that’s the downside of democracy.  It also has an upside.  We never have to wonder where the other guy is standing.
Occasionally, politics on both sides of this divide -- these tactical divides-- is used to try to gain advantage.  But you're all sophisticated enough to know that.  So I urge you, let’s talk about what the facts are, what the perspective is of each of us.
With regard to Iran, from the very beginning we’ve consulted with the Israeli government, militarily, intelligence -- I’ve spent hours, myself personally, and I’m not doing the negotiation.  Jake Sullivan, my guy, was the guy who was doing a lot of this, and Bill Burns.  But every aspect of this policy has been discussed in detail. 
You all are very familiar with and occasionally use the word “chutzpah.”  I hope I made you aware of an Irish phrase “malarkey” -- malarkey.  There’s been a lot of malarkey around our position on Iran.  So let me state it absolutely clearly: 
We will not let Iran acquire a nuclear weapon.  Period.  Period.  End of discussion.  It will not happen on our watch.
A diplomatic solution that puts significant and verifiable constraints on Iran’s nuclear program represents the best and most sustainable chance to ensure that America, Israel, the entire Middle East will never be menaced by a nuclear-armed Iran.
And we remain committed to seek an agreement that meaningfully and verifiably blocks Iran from the pathways that it has available to it to create fissile material for a bomb; a nuclear breakout in its uranium enrichment facilities; the plutonium path, using Iran’s Arak reactor; or a covert nuclear program. 
That’s why, through hard-nosed diplomacy, we’ve rallied the world to put in place the toughest multilateral sanctions regime in history against the Iranian government.  That’s what brought Iran to the negotiation table in the first place.  Up to that time, Iran had been making steady progress in every administration -- in every administration they’d been making steady progress.  I don't know how many conversations I had with the Prime Minister and others about how we could never put together a regime of sanctions that could hold.  My guy turned out to be right.  We could and he did.
As a consequence of our negotiations, Iran has frozen significant elements of its program in exchange for very moderate sanctions relief through this so-called Joint Plan of Action, reached over one year ago and extended for an additional seven months just two weeks ago. 
The agreement has brought significant benefits. Hasn’t solved the whole problem, but the agreement -- before the agreement, Iran was accumulating a growing stockpile of low-enriched uranium.  Now that stockpile is no longer growing.
Remember the Prime Minister standing up, famously drawing -- with that famous drawing at the United Nations with the line, standing there as he spoke of Iran’s path to the bomb.  Before the Joint Plan of Action, Iran was inching up that -- toward that red line, accumulating 20 percent-enriched uranium, far closer to bomb grade. 
Now, Iran has moved in the opposite direction, neutralizing its entire stockpile of 20 percent-enriched uranium.  And under the new extension, it has committed additional steps to turn this material into reactor fuel, taking it off the table and away from a breakout scenario.
Before, Iran was installing new and more sophisticated centrifuges.  They have a lot of them on the sideline.  But now, under the Joint Plan of Action, they have not installed or operated any additional centrifuges, including the next-generation models.
And the terms of the new extension place tighter curbs on its ability to pursue an advanced centrifuge program.  Before, Iran was moving toward a heavy-water plutonium reactor at Arak. 
Now, that effort, too, is frozen.   Inspectors -- inspections before were limited.  Now Iran has allowed daily access at Natanz and Fordow, and inspections at new sites such as centrifuge production facilities -- access that has been expanded even further in the new extension. 
This doesn't solve the problem, but this matters.  The more frequent and intrusive monitoring we have, the sooner we’ll be able to know if Iran tries to break out or sneak out, and the longer we have to do what is necessary to prevent it occurring.
The Joint Plan of Action is not a perfect or permanent solution.  But it provides us time to negotiate, to see if it’s possible to reach a comprehensive agreement that can peacefully ensure that Iran will not develop a nuclear weapon.
And all of this was accomplished with very modest sanctions relief.  And if Iran takes the concrete, verifiable steps necessary to achieve a comprehensive deal, it will it begin to receive true relief from nuclear-related sanctions and be able to offer a better future to its people.
In the meantime, make no mistake about it:  the Iranian economy remains under tremendous pressure.  The overwhelming majority of the sanctions remain in place.  It is true that Iran will be able to repatriate $4.9 billion in revenues as a consequence of the new extension, but that’s very modest relief overall, a small fraction of the $100 billion in Iranian funds that remain blocked around the world; the $60 billion to $70 billion Iran needs each year to fund its imports; the $35 billion it needs to close its budget deficit.
Sanctions have already done significant damage to Iran’s economy and continue to do so.  The Iranian riyal is about -- has depreciated about 50 percent since June of 2012.  Since 2011, sanctions have caused Iran to lose over $200 billion in oil revenue, including $35 billion just since the signing of the Joint Plan of Action.  Iran’s annual inflation rate is about 21 percent.  Iran’s economy is 20 to 25 percent smaller today than it would have been had it remained out -- had it remained on its pre-2011 trajectory.  The bottom falling out of oil prices has further complicated Iran’s economic outlook.
And crucially, for the first time, we have a diplomatic context in which the Iranians are continuing to make progress -- they can no longer continue to make progress on their nuclear program while they talk. 
None of these constraints would be in place without the Joint Plan of Action.  And as we pursue a comprehensive agreement, one thing I can guarantee you is that the President -- what the President told you a year ago, right at this forum, Haim, he said:  We will not accept a bad deal. 
Our decision to extend the Joint Plan of Action proved that we will continue to press the Iranians to get a good deal that satisfies our bottom lines.  The result of our determination has been that the Iranians have begun to show flexibility on some important issues. 
This progress was not enough to lead to an agreement.  But it was enough to justify an extension to see whether -- whether or not, now that Iran understands the firmness of our core requirements, whether or not we can reach an agreement that keeps America, our allies, Israel, and the world safe.
     And so we have agreed to extend these talks for seven additional months, with the goal of completing a broad agreement on the core elements in four months and technical annexes over the next three months after that.  
We believe that we have enough leverage to reach a comprehensive agreement.  There are no guarantees of success, though, to state the obvious.  But there are steps we can take -— and steps we can hold off on -– that increase the odds or diminish the odds that we could succeed.
I know there are some in this room and some on the Hill that this is the moment for additional sanctions.  Remember back several years ago when the understandable pessimism was, could we hold the P5-plus-1 together?  Could we hold Russia?  Could we hold China?  One of the elements, as Martin Indyk can tell you and others, that are stake here is the need to hold the P5-plus-1 together tightly.  And actions we take can impact on that probability. 
There may well come the time when increased pressure is needed and welcome.  I’ve met with over 168 members of the House and Senate.  I’ve made it clear there may very well be a time when we are not only welcoming, we're asking for additional sanctions.
Should Iran violate the terms of our agreement, Congress and the administration could immediately impose new sanctions.  And the President has made it clear that he’d be part of that.  But now is not the right time to do that.  We could end up with the worst of all worlds:  breaking up the coalition, no peaceful resolution of Iran’s nuclear programs; and less leverage to achieve one.
And with all that is happening in the region, this is not the time to risk a breakdown when we still have a chance for a breakthrough.  This is the moment to give our negotiators a little bit more time and space to see if they can reach an agreement that benefits everyone. 
Our strategy has been underestimated from the beginning.  I told, you remember, many people said we couldn’t even put together the coalition to keep the most successful sanctions in modern history.  Some people including some of you in this room, good people, Democrats and Republicans, said the Joint Plan of Action was a mistake.  Look where we find ourselves.  It has frozen its program, it’s given us a shot for a peaceful solution. 
I tell you I think it’s less than an even shot, but it’s a shot.  Some said Iran would never abide by the terms of the Joint Plan of Action.  But according to each and every monthly report by the IAEA, Iran has held up its end of the bargain and honored the agreement.
Some said that the modest sanctions relief would provide the ability to see a collapse in the sanctions regime, predicted that companies would flood back into Iran.  And we know -- we all know, we can name the companies in different countries who could hardly wait to flow back in to Iran.  But they haven’t.  They haven’t. 
So we have made progress, real progress in that the program is basically frozen. And we’ve sharpened some fundamental choices for the Iranians:  either seize an historic opportunity to prove that its nuclear program is peaceful and fully rejoin the world economy and the community of nations or face unrelenting pressure.
This is not the time, nor do I have the -- nor do we have the time now, but all of you in this room know, there’s a lot of change taking place inside Iran, as well -- some good, some bad.  But the idea there’s one single monolith in Iran that is able to be sustained, I think that is a foolish view of modern history.  It could be worse.  But it also could be better.
A good deal exists that would benefit America, Iran, Israel and the world –- if Iran is willing to take the deal.  I’m making no predictions that they will.  But I guarantee you unless they do, there will be no agreement.
And as we move forward, just as we have done so far, we will continue to consult on every jot and tittle, every detail with our Israeli friends every step of the way. 
But you all know as well as I do, Israel’s future as a democratic homeland for the Jewish people depends on far more than prevailing and keeping Iran from becoming a nuclear-armed nation.  It depends on reaching a two-state solution -- two states for two people.
Ladies and gentlemen, it’s -- it is a difficult job to stay engaged -- for Israelis and for us -- in trying to figure out how to arrive at such a solution.  But we continue to believe that -- at least I do, and the President does -- that the vast majority of Israelis and Palestinians, they think that it is the right way to go.  But it’s frightening.  It’s frightening and the chances that have to be taken are very, very difficult for leaders to step up and take.  And I understand that.
The fact is that I think we have no choice but to continue to try.  I -- ultimately, every one of these decisions will be left and should be left to the government of Israel.  But the end result of a two-state solution with each enjoying self-determination, security and mutual recognition is I think -- not only is the right thing vis-à-vis the Palestinians and Israelis, but has the potential to unlock a whole new potential. 
Given the demographic realities that remain, the best and only option to ensure the survival of a democratic state, a Jewish homeland in Israel is such a negotiation.
Like you, I understand the obstacles.  And we have no illusions about Hamas.  It says a great deal that this terrorist group chooses to pour its resources into the ground for sophisticated tunnels to infiltrate Israel, instead of building hospitals and schools and meeting the needs of the people of Gaza.  
But I also remain convinced, as I said, that the vast majority of Israelis and the vast majority of Palestinians believe -- as President Obama said in Jerusalem last year -—
that peace is possible, peace is necessary, and peace is just. 
And just think of the opportunities it could provide.  As you look across the region, for the first time in modern history, a surprising thing is happening.  Israel and several of its Arab neighbors -- Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and others –- find themselves on the same side of two very important struggles:  the fight against violent extremism, including ISIL, or as our Arab friends say, Daesh; and a regional struggle against Iran and its proxies.  
For perhaps the first time in history, Israel – Israel’s-- interests are in general convergence with those basic interests as well as the Arabs.  That creates a chance -— nothing more, just a chance -- for closer relations between Israel and the Arab world.
In some ways, this is already unfolding in quiet dialogue between security officials from countries whose diplomats
wouldn’t greet each other at airports in the recent past, and still won’t.  But the only way to fully realize this opportunity -- one that would give Israel more opportunities in the region than it now has -- is for Israel and the Palestinians to make progress toward peace. 
And it’s the quickest way to destroy -- and the quickest way to destroy any prospects of a true strategic realignment in the region, which would take time, but can begin, is to deny a political horizon toward a two-state solution -— or worse, to allow a cycle of provocation and violence to be unleashed and unleash instability on the ground. 
And it’s because of America’s commitment to Israel’s security –- not in spite of it -— we are frank with our allies when we have concerns.   We appreciated the critical statesmanship of Prime Minister Netanyahu, and King Abdullah of Jordan, and President Abbas in working out to reaffirm the historic status quo and to make sure that tensions over the
Temple Mount and Haram-al-Sharif don’t boil over into a conflict and conflagration in Jerusalem that engulfs the entire country.
But all sides have more work to do to lessen tensions and prevent further provocations, and I think they understand that in my conversations, at least. 
We’re frank about this with the Palestinians.  And we have to be tough and honest -- have tough and honest conversations with them about what they need to do, and they need to do so much more to combat the instances of incitement, including on social media. 
And we’re frank with our Israeli friends about the actions that we consider counterproductive:  expanding settlement activity and construction, including in sensitive areas in East Jerusalem and the West Bank; the demolition of the homes of relatives of attackers.  That can't be a justification for the abhorrent killing of innocent civilians.  [Sic] There is no justification.  But punishment of families -— collective punishment -— risks stoking tensions even further.
We’ve also spoken about our shared concern about preventing vigilante attacks against Israeli Arabs and Palestinians, and investigating those that occur, and swiftly bringing to justice the perpetrators of those crimes.  And that's what the government is doing now and has been, quite frankly.
It is simply too easy for provocations from either side to ignite violence that no one can control, which ultimately hurts everyone.  In all of these instances, all around the world, the lowest common denominator has the ability to bring everything down.  And it’s hard as hell to overcome that lowest common denominator.
We know from long experience that none of these issues are easy or simple.  But we believe there is a better path.  And if Israel and the Palestinians can find their way to peace, the possibilities are limitless.
There is no one threat that worries me more though than the rising tide of anti-Semitism around the world.  With the encouragement of some of you in this audience, including Joe, I remember holding hearings in the mid ‘80s about anti-Semitism in Europe and being criticized:  Why was I holding those hearings?  But you were right, Joe.
When we were expanding NATO, I remember you calling me after I was in Poland, and I was asked before 3,000 people at the University of Warsaw is there anything that could stop Poland’s admission.  I said, yes, anti-Semitism -- because of what was going on at the prison -- at the death camp.
But anti-Semitism goes hand in hand -- it’s bad under any circumstance, but now it goes hand in hand in what I would call an overall effort to delegitimize Israel -- to delegitimize Israel in almost every quarter.
You see it all over the world.  This summer, during the conflict in Gaza, we saw too many people in too many places
cross the line from legitimate criticism into demonization and outright anti-Semitism.  You saw it in demonstrations that devolved into mobs that torched synagogues.  You see it in menacing messages on social media.  You see it in attacks on religious Jews on streets of major European cities.  
It is a fundamental threat not simply to Jews, primarily -- but not simply to Jews, but to legitimization of the State of Israel and to democracy itself.  There can be no tolerance for anti-Semitism.  And I’m proud that America works to expose and combat such bigotry wherever it finds it around the world. 
And, as the President said in Jerusalem:  Make no mistake -– those who adhere to the ideology rejecting Israel’s right to exist, they might as well reject the earth beneath them or the sky above, because Israel is not going anywhere.  Anywhere. 
The preservation of a secure, democratic Israel is the only certain guarantor of the freedom and security for Jews worldwide.  Joe and others have heard me tell this story, but it was -- I remember how it struck me.
As a young senator, I’ve had the great privilege of meeting and getting to know every Prime Minister in Israel since Golda Meir.  I was permitted to -- well, I won’t go into it.  But I was in Israel just before the Yom Kippur War, days before.  And I was meeting with Prime Minister Golda Meir, which was one of the -- because of my job, I’ve gotten to meet almost every world leader in the last 40 years.  Not figuratively, literally.  And she was impressive.  I just was so excited to meet her.  And I sat in front of her desk.  And she had that bank of maps behind her, she kept pulling up and down.  She had -- you know those charts. 
And I was sitting next to a guy who was her aide, on my right, in a seat in front of her, a guy named Rabin.  And she kept me there for the better part -- I could have stayed another two hours, about an hour and a half.  And she went into vivid detail with me about the Six Day War, and reading me letters from Israeli soldiers who had died, to their families, et cetera, and then -- and chain-smoking and flipping to another map and show me where -- as I said, this went on for well over an hour.  And I was engrossed, but I was getting more morose as every minute went on.  And I know you remember this story, Joe, but it’s absolutely true.  She -- and finally, she just looked at me as if we had been talking about a recent football match or something.  And she said, would you like a photo opportunity?  And I looked at her, and I said, well, yes, Madam Prime Minister.
And those double-doors that open out into that little square outside the office there, walked outside, and there were a battery of reporters and mostly cameramen.  They weren’t asking questions.  They were just taking pictures.  And I was standing to her right.  And we were both looking straight ahead.  While looking straight ahead without turning her head to talk to me, she said, Senator, you look so worried.  And I turned to her -- I was supposed to keep looking straight -- I turned to her, and I said, well, I am, Madam Prime Minister, what you just laid out.  She said, oh, without looking at me, just looking straight ahead.  She said, don't worry.  We Jews have a secret weapon in our struggle with the Arabs. 
And I thought she was about to tell me something profound.  It turned out it was profound, but I thought she was going to tell me about some weapon or some plan or whatever.  And I turned and looked at her.  She still didn't turn and look at me.  Looking straight ahead, she said, our secret weapon is we have no place else to do.
As long as we keep that mind as Americans, no matter how frustrated we may get -- and it’s personal dealings occasionally -- and as I said to -- I just spoke to 4,000 members of North American federation -- Jewish Federation [of North America], and the [sic] Israeli Prime Minister in the front row, and I said, send a message to Bibi, I love him.  I love him.  And I had signed a picture years ago to him.  I said, Bibi, I don't agree with a damn thing you have to say, but I love you.  (Laughter.) 
I agree with a lot he has to say.  But if friends can't acknowledge -- if friends can't acknowledge the very things that are acknowledged in each of our countries vis-à-vis one another, then it’s not much of a friendship. 
So my message to you all is, please, let’s keep whatever disagreements we have in perspective because they don't go to the heart, the soul, they don't go to the essence of who we are as Americans and who Israelis are.  There is no daylight.  None, none, none, between Israel’s security and the United States.
God bless you all and may God protect Israel and our troops.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
1:52 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 22, 2014
Statement to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and Turkish President Recep Erdogan
Beylerbeyi Palace
Istanbul, Turkey
6:20 P.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT ERDOĞAN: (English audio unavailable.)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Mr. President, I’m delighted to be here. We’ve been -- we’ve known each other for many years. And I’ve been the recipient of your hospitality in your city; last time I was here in your home with your family. And it is -- this city has come to define for me what hospitality really means.
As I told my fellow Americans during the President’s visit to Washington, you can’t understand the meaning of hospitality until you’ve been welcomed by a Turkish family into their home. And again, my thanks to you and your daughter and your son and your wife. And thank your wife for hosting my wife, Jill, today. She is anxious to see her again.
Mr. President, I’m not sure our teams are going to allow us to get together any more. We came to have lunch, and you and I ended up having a conversation that lasted almost four hours. So I don't think they're happy when we go off alone in a room together. When we came down, they looked very, very hungry. So I apologize to our collective staffs.
The President and I, as I said, have known each other for a long time. I have great respect for the President. And we have always had a direct, frank and open discussion on every issue because that's what friends do, that’s what allies do.
And the one thing that is absolutely clear is that the depth of that friendship and the resolve of that partnership is as strong as it has ever been. In spite of the fact that the world is facing and we collectively are facing some difficult problems right now.
The President and I have been talking about Iraq and Syria for a long time. We wanted to get to some of the detail today. We spoke about our work as part of an international coalition to degrade and eventually defeat Daash, ISIL -- and most people in this region and I’m comfortable referring to ISIL as Daash. And we talked about Syria’s future, as well.
We had a candid discussion, and we strategized together as allies and friends do and should. On Iraq, the President told me of his impressions of developments taking place in Iraq. I had an opportunity to spend several hours yesterday and again this morning with the Prime Minister who just returned from Iraq. And we're on the same page. We have the same view.
And we’re -- I was -- I told the President how impressed the new Iraqi government was at the fact that he and his government reached out a hand to the Iraqi government, and they're working in close coordination with Prime Minister Dr. Abadi.
Turkey has shown significant leadership in this regard. As I said, including the Prime Minister’s recent visit to Erbil and to Baghdad last week.
On Syria, we discussed in-depth the full range of issues that face us both and the options available to deal with those issues. Not only to deny ISIL a safe haven, and to roll them back and defeat them, but also to strengthen the Syrian opposition and pursue a political transition away from the Assad regime.
We spoke about our efforts to train and equip the moderate Syrian opposition forces, and the others protecting their communities.
Turkey, as a consequence of what’s going on in Syria today, is carrying a heavy humanitarian burden. There are over -- I’m told by the President -- close to 1.6 million refugees in Turkey. And Turkey is providing, as they do in humanitarian relief from housing, to health care, to food, to clothing. And it’s the government and the people of Turkey that have often cared for those displaced by this war. Accommodating so many is a costly proposition. And the United States has provided humanitarian assistance inside Turkey to refugee countries holding them, but it should not in any way underestimate the amount of the requirements that have imposed upon the President and the people of Turkey.
We have devoted -- because of what Turkey is doing, we’ve been able to devote roughly a little over $3 billion to this effort, including $200 million to Turkey, which is not nearly the cost they incur. But collectively we are working to deal with the humanitarian crisis in Turkey, the largest burden of that being thrust upon the Turkish people.
And beyond our humanitarian efforts, we’re both taking a -- talking to and working together to stem the flow of foreign fighters to and from the battlefields of Iraq and Syria, and to dry up their funding. And we thank Turkey for their leadership in this regard.
On Cyprus -- we spoke about Cyprus. I traveled to Cyprus in May, and I met with both Mr. Eroğlu and as well as President Anastasiades. And I’m told I didn't realize at the time I was the highest-ranking American in five decades to visit the island. Because our administration and the United States remains committed to supporting the U.N.-led effort to renew the island as a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation.
Today, the potential exists -- if the political will is there -- to reach a solution that benefits everyone on the island and in the region. Right now that requires a focus on de-escalating tensions and returning to the negotiating table in Cyprus. Given the significant energy potential in the Eastern Mediterranean, the rewards to both communities on Cyprus of finding a cooperative path forward has never been greater. The visit also gave me an opportunity to discuss the importance of our robust economic partnership with Turkey, as well.
In addition, I had an excellent meeting with Turkish civil society earlier today. And, Mr. President, our countries have been allies for 60 years. I would posit today that our partnership is as strong as it ever has been. Today we're working closely together once again to meet the very pressing challenges of this moment, and to further strengthen the strategic partnership between Turkey and America.
I said earlier, we need Turkey. And I think Turkey believes that they need us, as well. We are close. We are going to continue to discuss how to approach each of these problems in the region. And as I said, I thank you, Mr. President, for your welcome and your hospitality and for your friendship to my country. Thank you.
END
6:28 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 22, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on European Energy Security to the Atlantic Council Energy and Economic Summit
Grand Tarabya Hotel
Istanbul, Turkey
10:58 A.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT: Well, ladies and gentlemen, it’s an honor to be here. I would tell you, I say to my good friend, Jim Jones, former National Security Advisor, General. General, I have a new attitude toward birthdays. And there was a famous American athlete, a professional baseball player who did not get to play in what we call the Major Leagues until he was 45 years old. His name was Satchel Paige. He was a pitcher. And on his 47th birthday, the oldest pitcher pitching, he won a game. And the press went into the locker room after the game and said -- they referred to him as Satch. They said, Satch, how does it feel being 47 and pitching in the big leagues and winning a game?
He looked at them. He said, fellahs, that's not how I look at it. He said, let me tell you how I view age. I think of it this way: How old would you be if you didn’t know how old you are? (Laughter.) I am 42 years old. (Laughter.) And that's the way I think of it, and I’m standing by it, Jim.
It’s great to be speaking once again before the Atlantic Council. I’m pleased to be here in Istanbul, a perfect place to talk about the issues before us, and with my good friend and he is my good friend. I was kidding the Prime Minister last time we -- we’ve known each other a long time, and he used to be the Foreign Minister. And now he’s the Prime Minister. And I’m still the Vice President. (Laughter.) But he still likes me, and I still like him. (Laughter.)
But this is the perfect place to have this discussion sitting at the crossroads of Europe and Asia, a vital part of the Mediterranean and the Middle East. And I’ve just come from Ukraine, where the United States and our European partners are working shoulder-to-shoulder within the country’s democratically elected leadership to support Ukraine’s democratic development and its European aspirations.
Quite frankly, Russian aggression in Ukraine and its illegal occupation of Crimea remind us that we still have a good deal more work to do to guarantee the strategic vision of a Europe whole, free and at peace.
As I said when I spoke at a similar gathering at the Atlantic Alliance [sic] in Washington this May, this vision of Europe whole and free and at peace is the right vision. But we need to redouble our efforts to achieve it. At Wales, NATO renewed its determination to protect and defend every inch of NATO territory; to increase defense spending to 2 percent for all our NATO allies; to strengthen NATO’s readiness to deploy quickly whenever and wherever they are needed.
But as the story of Ukraine shows, there are multiple dimensions to European security. And the Prime Minister and I spoke of many of them last night for some time, as he was kind enough to host me for dinner. Obviously, one of the dimensions is hard military power. But we're also facing new weapons being used, and used by Russia and others.
First is a new development, the use of corruption and oligarchy-kleptocracy as a tool of international coercion. Second, is use of energy as a weapon, undermining the security of nations. Global energy security is a vital part of America’s national security. In East Asia, President Obama and President Xi just signed a historic agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the United States has launched an initiative to double the access to electric power. We call is Power Africa. And in the Caribbean and Central America, our administration has launched a new, regional energy strategy to help boost sustainable economic growth and diversity of energy sources.
But here in Europe, energy is -- energy security is an especially vital regional security interest because of Russia’s track record in using the supply of energy as a foreign policy weapon against its neighbors in violation of basic commercial and international norms.
This is a huge strategic problem for many countries that rely on Russia for their energy supply. But the truth is this is also a unique moment for Europe. Europe has a real opportunity to change their circumstances. We believe -- the President and I -- we believe that energy security is the next chapter in the European project of integration and market expansion that began decades ago with European coal and steel.
As a matter of economic and national security, that means we need governments and the European Commission to work hand-in-hand with the private sector to ensure diversity in sources of fuel from hydrocarbons to renewables; diversity in countries of origin, from North Africa, to the Eastern Mediterranean, to the United States; more interconnections, that supply routes that are more reliable -- everything from new pipelines to LNG facilities.
We have been aware that this single source of energy has been a problem for a long time in Europe. But now, now, now is the time to act. What’s happening in Ukraine only underscores the urgency. And my message here is not that Europe can or should do away with Russian imports. That's not the case at all. I have no doubt that Russia will and should remain a major source of energy supplies for Europe and the world.
This is about energy security. To achieve it, Europe needs to ensure it diversifies its resources, its routes and its suppliers.
Russia can and should be a player, but it has to play by the rules of the game. It shouldn’t be able to use its energy policy to play with the game.
True energy security in Europe is going to require some tough decisions, but there’s been progress. As you know, Europe experienced three energy crises in ’06, ’09 and again in 2014 when Russia shut off its supplies to Ukraine and other parts of Europe. Countries have stepped up to the plate; and with each successive crisis, we’ve made some progress.
For example, in 2008 [sic], when gas from Ukraine was cut off, Slovaks were shocked to find themselves suffering in the cold winter for two weeks, something they thought would never happen because their country lay on the route to Western Europe.
But then Slovakia adapted, and quickly built interconnections with its neighbors, enabling it to receive supplies from the Czech Republic within 24 hours in case of another such emergency. This time, this winter, there wasn’t even a threat. That’s progress.
At the same time, the U.S. and EU launched an aggressive energy diplomacy shortly after the 2009 cutoff to ensure that reserve flows -- reverse flows of gas could even be available to Ukraine from its neighbors during future crises.
The fruits of that diplomacy paid off this year, when Russia cut off the gas to Ukraine in June, and Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia quickly moved in to help.
Ukraine risked another crisis this winter. But through skillful European mediation and active U.S. engagement, Russia and Ukraine reached an agreement that will keep the gas flowing this winter. That, too, is progress.
We saw other key milestones a few weeks ago when Lithuania inaugurated its liquefied natural gas terminal, appropriately named “The Independence.” I met with the Lithuanian Prime Minister in Washington in October, shortly before the launch.
In combination of this new facility, an emerging LNG deal between Finland and Estonia; and action by Baltic states to interconnect their electricity and gas supplies, both to one another and to Europe and Scandinavia as a whole; together, these things have the potential to make the Baltic “energy island” a thing of the past.
The region that was once almost entirely dependent on Russia has seized the initiative and now is on track to achieve greater energy securityand not incidentally greater freedom. All this marks a genuine advancement in our agenda. But we can’t rest on our laurels. You all know better than I we have to go much further. We have to finish the job.
That’s one of the reasons why I recently went to Cyprus -- the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit Cyprus in five decades -- because I wanted to encourage the Cypriots to develop their energy resources in cooperation with all -- all -- their neighbors; and to make clear that everyone benefits if the entire Eastern Mediterranean can work together to become a hub for natural gas markets.
Promoting energy security was also a major reason why I recently visited Romania. Romania can be a linchpin in delivering gas to its neighbors and even become an energy exporter for its neighbors across Central and Eastern Europe. Croatia is another country with potential to become a regional energy hub if it makes smart investments now, with EU support, and works collaboratively with its neighbors.
When President Obama visited Poland in June and Estonia in September, he called on leaders across Europe to do far more to expand and diversify their energy supplies and to work closely with one another.
We are hopeful the new E.U. Commission’s focus on Energy Union will be a step in that direction. So what do we need to do now? What actually needs to happen?
Well, in our view, to start, we need to identify critical infrastructure projects, increase the interconnectedness between European countries -- from pipelines, to electric grids, to integration of renewables, to energy efficiency standards.
Last year the EU created a mechanism to identify and help fund the most important energy infrastructure projects. But more needs to be done to make the hard decisions to prioritize projects, to focus support, to integrate Central and Eastern Europe.
I know a major obstacle is building the infrastructure. Some of the projects I just mentioned -- the LNG terminal in Lithuania, for example; the reverse-flow interconnectors -- they require long term certainty to be commercially viable on their own.
And I know that current economic conditions make it hard for governments to support infrastructure that, strictly speaking, may not be requiredto meet the narrow definition of energy demand. But that’s what leadership is about. That's what this moment is about -- having the vision and making the choices today to ensure a better and more secure European future.
Leadership also requires nations to work togetheron common policy and investment strategy. If each state operates on its own, all will wind up in a weaker position. In this regard, I was glad to see the EU carry out region-wide energy stress tests, underscoring the importance of coordination.
Another part of improving energy security is to make way for the fuel mix of the future. What the EU has done to integrate renewable energy into its fuel mix is remarkable. The ambitious targets that the EU has set for renewables, for energy efficiency, to cut emissions set a strong example for the rest of the world. And we in the United States are partners in this effort, working toward the same goals.
We also need to help develop new opportunities to bring new sources of supply to Europe. Years ago when I was Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations in the United States Senate, I worked with then President Clinton to launch what was called the Contract of the Century. This was the BTC Pipeline, which would bring Caspian oil to Europe and to the global markets. If you’ll remember -- not any of you women are old enough to remember this -- but if you remember, most believed it would never happen. But with U.S. leadership and the commitments of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, it became a reality. Twenty years later, the BTC’s counterpart, the Southern Corridor is close to becoming a reality and should -- must -- become a reality.
With U.S. support, Turkish leadership, Azeri leadership, this ambitious project is traversing Azerbaijan through Georgia, Turkey, Greece, Albania and Italy -- will bring gas for the first time from the Caspian to Europe, a game changer for energy security in Europe.
Today, the energy potential of the Eastern Mediterranean can also play significant strategic and economic dividends for the region itself and Europe as a whole.
For the region, it holds the promise of enhancing stability and prosperity by bringing together Israel, Turkey, Egypt, Greece, Cyprus and hopefully one day Lebanon. It also has the potential to bring new supplies into Europe, to increase its energy security by diversifying energy resources.
This was a big part my message when I was in Cyprus in May, that energy can and should serve as the tool for cooperation, for stability, for security and prosperity. And I’ve asked the State Department’s Energy Envoy, Amos Hochstein, to continue this work. We have a chance to connect the promising developments in the Mediterranean with resources as distant as Azerbaijan and Iraq to ensure greater energy security and national security for all involved.
If we get it right, and it will be difficult, but if we get it right, all will benefit from greater stability, economic growth, jobs and prosperity; from functioning marketplaces for energy -- European energy -- with all the strategic benefits that that brings.
This is also a great moment for energy in Turkey, which has already been playing a role as the energy hub for oil and is poised to play a much bigger role in gas.
That's why I was encouraged to see the recent interim agreement between Baghdad and Erbil on managing exports and revenue sharing. And we continue to support the development of a strategic pipeline from Basra to Jehan. As the regional global energy picture evolves, Turkey’s strategic location is a major, major asset. Turkey will host the G20 next year. And we welcome Turkey’s leadership in carrying forward the important work of the G20 on energy efficiency and climate change.
Turkey’s domestic market potential is also significant. In fact, Turkey is only one of Europe -- is one of Europe’s largest gas markets. It’s the only one expected to grow in the next decade. So the United States stands ready to help Turkey realize its energy potential in any way they think we can be helpful.
This will require the development of competitive gas markets to attract private investment, improve infrastructure and strengthen Turkey’s ability to become a gas hub. And as Secretary Moniz, who was here last week, told our Turkish counterparts, we're already working on renewables together, Turkey and the United States.
As leaders in the formulation of energy policy around the world, it’s within your power to help make energy insecurity in Europe and many other places a thing of the past. That should be one of our goals. We have to keep our eye on the horizon, keep moving past old ways of doing business, keep making energy a tool of cooperation, not a tool of division.
If we can do that, we can achieve a Europe not just whole, free and at peace, but prosperous and secure, a leader in shaping the world’s energy future. That would be good for all of us. So let’s make it happen. Now is the time to act. Let’s not wait any longer.
Thank you for your hospitality and thank you for listening. (Applause.)
END
11:18 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 20, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to the Global Entrepreneurship Summit
Global Entrepreneurship Summit Plenary Tent
Marrakech, Morocco
10:35 A.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  What a delight to be here.  (Laughter.)
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Happy birthday.
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  It’s nice of His Majesty to assemble this crowd for my birthday.  (Laughter.)  I appreciate it.  (Applause.)  I am getting to the age where I don’t look forward to birthdays.
AUDIENCE:  (Sings “Happy Birthday”.)  (Applause.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  I was telling the President of Gabon that I have a new attitude as to how to compute one’s age.  There was a famous American baseball player named Satchel Paige.  And he was a great pitcher in American baseball.  And he was pitching in the Major Leagues well beyond his years.  And on his 47th birthday, the sportswriters went into the locker room and said, Satchel, what’s it feel like to be so old and still be pitching?  (Laughter.)  And he looked at them and said, gentlemen, that’s not how I look at it.  Here’s how I look at age.  How old would you be if you didn’t know how old you are?  (Laughter.)  I am 42.  (Laughter and applause.)
Thank you very much.  To all the Excellencies, and to all the nearly 3,000-plus investors and inventors, businesspeople, government officials, leaders from over 50 countries, it’s good to be back at this summit.  I had the opportunity on the third summit to address it in Turkey.  And it’s a delight to be back here today, and I feel even more enthusiasm in the room today than I did then.  And it was full of enthusiasm then.  (Applause.)
Morocco -- and it’s particularly good to be here in Marrakech in Morocco.  What most people don’t realize is Morocco holds a special place in the heart of Americans.  Morocco is the first nation -- (applause) -- Morocco was the first nation in the world to recognize the United States of America 237 years ago in December 1777.  So I’ve come here to say thank you.  (Laughter and applause.)
I’ve also come here to an ancient Muslim nation at the crossroads of Africa, the Arab world and Europe to talk about what it takes for all nations to succeed in the 21st century, what is required to create thriving, innovative societies worthy of the talents of their young people.
You talk to people in this region and many of you and us are concerned about terrorism.  But outside the conflict zone, what they're really concerned about -- and we are as well -- is how our children, how their children find jobs. 
People everywhere in the world are hungry for economic opportunity.  And it’s about a lot more than being able to make money.  My father used to have an expression.  He’d say, Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck.  It’s about your dignity.  It’s about respect.  It’s about your place in your community.  And to be frank, the challenges ahead for all of us are immense, especially in regions with developing economies and rapidly growing populations.
Many of the countries represented here today have well over 60 percent of their population under the age of 30, some under the age of 25.  In the Middle East and Africa, for example, in a race to create tens of millions of jobs, just to break even, as the democratic wave -- demographic wave of young people enters the labor force, it doesn’t matter where you live if people cannot get educated; or they get educated and they can’t get a job; or they get a job and can’t earn a decent living; or they can earn a living, but it gets siphoned off or stolen by corruption; or if half the population -- women -- cannot contribute to prosperity; those countries caught in that vortex are not positioned to succeed in the 21st century because real and lasting stability depends on governments and citizens of this region finding a way to work together to expand opportunity and unlock the enormous talents of your people.
The challenge is formidable, but there are also incredible opportunities.  When I travel the region and the entire developing world, I see young people with limitless promise to make not only their countries but the whole world better.  That is not hyperbole.  That is not stated to appeal to the audience.  That is the reality.  That’s the world we live in.  And the opportunities out there for entrepreneurship have never been greater than they are right now.
To those of you who are older, think back 20 years ago.  Could you in your wildest dreams have envisioned half of the incredible breakthroughs that young entrepreneurs have created in those past 20 years?  And imagine -- just imagine -- what will happen in the next 20 as we unlock everything, including the dimensions of the human brain.  And we see people in the Middle East and Africa, and every region of the world using tools of technology undreamed of just a short time ago; and expanding possibilities beyond their wildest imaginations.
People like the young man from Lebanon, who after his father died of a heart attack, invented a 24/7 GPS-enabled heart-rate monitor to provide early warning for others, saving thousands of lives.  He raised a small amount of capital to get started.  He now employs 70 people.  Or the young Kenyan who founded a company to let children who couldn’t afford to buy textbooks read them one page at a time on their phones.
So how do we help?  How do we help these brilliant young minds?  How do we help entrepreneurship take even deeper root?
America’s experience, like many others, teaches us that fostering entrepreneurship is not just about crafting the right economic policy, or developing the best educated curricula.  It’s about creating an entire climate in which innovation and ideas flourish.
No two countries do it exactly the same way.  But there’s a common thread through all those that have succeeded.  Just like the basic rules of physics, there are certain basic rules that comprise the path to prosperity in the 21st century.  And societies and governments can choose for themselves whether or not to follow this path.
I’m not here to tell anyone else what’s in their interest.  I’m here on behalf of the President to state what we think best leads to that path.  In today’s fast-paced world, those that don’t follow the path are already being left behind.  So what is required to prosper in the 21st century?  What does it take?
It takes an education system, but one that is universal, open to all, including girls and women, that trains people to be skeptical.  I was meeting with a man many of you know, a wise man from Singapore named Lee Kuan Yew.  He was asking me why did I think America was able to reinvent itself so often.  I said, because stamped into the DNA of every naturalized American, as well as native born, is an inherent skepticism for orthodoxy.  You cannot fundamentally change the world without breaking the old.  It takes a value system that gives people the freedom to try and to fail, or as they say in the fabled Silicon Valley, fail forward, without being criticized.
To divert for just a moment, I spoke at a conference in the western part of my county, in Colorado a month ago.  And there were hundreds of brilliant young entrepreneurs and not-so-young very brilliant, very wealthy entrepreneurs from Silicon Valley.  And I sat next to a young woman who was in her 30s, who was already a billionaire and has come up with a way to test blood at about 25 times cheaper than the present way.  And she’s now working on cures for Ebola.
And I found out -- I said, where did you go to school?  She said, I dropped out of Stanford.  (Laughter.)  It seems to me the road to success is getting into Stanford and dropping out.  (Laughter.)  But to be very serious, it’s about challenging orthodoxy.
It takes a legal system that’s fair, where you know the contractual agreement you’ve made will be upheld and protected, a system where judges are not corrupt, where you can risk starting a business; and failure and bankruptcy doesn’t land you in prison; and maybe most importantly, one  that justly rewards and protects intellectual property.  You’d expect an American official to say that.  But for many societies, for any society that fails to protect intellectual property, I guarantee you that society will stifle entrepreneurship and economic innovation in their own society.  They may be able to steal, but they will always be behind the curve.
It takes a society that empowers women because entrepreneurship thrives when a society engages all the talents.  In the words of that Chinese proverb, women hold up half the sky.  Women hold up half the sky.  (Applause.)  And I might add they have at least half the grey matter.
It’s true.  It takes a political system founded on the rule of law that protects basic liberties, including the freedom of speech, the freedom of religion, one that roots out the cancer of corruption, the worst enemy of entrepreneurship.
In the 21st century where some countries seek to use oligarchic and kleptocracy as tools of international coercion, corruption is a threat not only to economic growth, but to security and sovereignty.  Fighting corruption is not just good governance.  It’s self-defense.  It’s patriotism.  Lots of nations are struggling to decide whether they are confident enough to trust their people to follow that path.  To the extent they do, they have prospered.  To the extent they don’t, they haven’t.  All those factors I’ve mentioned create the context in our view for entrepreneurship to take root.
Where they're absent, the same human talent remains, but too often it is squandered.  Many of the best and brightest leave -- simply leave their homes.  And many of them come to America.
Ladies and gentlemen, in 2017, the United States for the first time, Caucasians of European descent like me will be in an absolute minority in the United States of America.  The secret that people don’t know is our diversity is the reason for our incredible strength because the brightest, the most innovative, the most adventuresome, the greatest risk takers, they’re the ones who leave when they cannot flourish and seek other places.  (Applause.)
We in America are proud to welcome them.  From Einstein, who fled Nazi Germany, to Sergey Brin who fled the prejudice and tyranny of Soviet Russia to found Google in America, and so many others.  But we also seek a world, it’s in our naked self-interest to want a world where everyone everywhere can reach their full potential in their own society.  It is in our self-interest to see societies succeed.  Because when they succeed, stability follows, less unrest, less violence, less extremism, more capacity to partner and trade and solving problems. 
Each of us has a role to play in helping us seize the potential inherent in our age.  Aspiring entrepreneurs must do what comes naturally to them:  Dream, take chances.  And in the phrase, the memorable phrase of Steve Jobs when a young man in Stanford said, Mr. Jobs, how can I be more like you?  He had two words.  He said, think different.  Think different.  (Applause.)
You cannot think different where you cannot breathe free.  You cannot think different where you cannot challenge orthodoxy.  You cannot think different where you cannot speak your mind.  (Applause.)  And for those who think the same do not hold promise for progress because the only way change comes it thinking different.
Established entrepreneurs and chambers of commerce must mentor the next generation.  That’s what President Obama had in mind in setting up this conference.  They have an obligation to share the wisdom they gained by their success and equally as much by their failures.  Universities must work through research and internships to nurture and develop entrepreneurial skills of students before they graduate.
Every one of you women and men here who have been successful -- and you have been -- I’ll bet you can look back to some time in your youth where you were exposed to someone doing something you’d never seen before.  And you’ve realized I can do that.  I can do that.
The single most valuable resource on this planet I think we could all agree on in this room is not what’s in the ground, but what’s in the mind.  It’s the single least explored part of the world, the mind.  The things that are going to happen in the next two, five, 10, 15 years are breathtaking.  Investors, they have to be willing to expand the horizon and invest in early stage entrepreneurs -- not only in Silicon Valley -- but in Nairobi and Dakar, everywhere, everywhere where there’s talent. 
Governments have to unlock the marketplace of ideas by allowing people to express their views openly about what they're thinking and what they're trying.
They must unlock the commercial marketplace by eliminating barriers to access to capital; ensuring that rules are fair and predictable, removing excessive cumbersome regulations. 
The government can’t grow the economy by itself.  As a matter of fact, it’s not the major reason.  It’s a catalyst for growth -- no matter how big the megaproject.  To prosper in the 21st century, you also need to grow from the bottom up, allowing your people to unlock their talents through private enterprise and political and economic freedom and action.
Events like this one help re-create and regenerate the culture of entrepreneurship.  We have an expression in my country when you’re saying something that probably the whole audience agrees with, you say it’s like preaching to the choir.  Well, there’s a very strong choir out there of some of the brilliant, brilliant young entrepreneurs that are in this facility.
As one Moroccan tweeted, “I remember the time when entrepreneurship in Morocco was synonymous with being in a precarious state.”  He went on to say, “But today entrepreneurship is celebrated at GES in Marrakech.”  (Applause.)
But I need not tell any of you.  There’s much more to do, more young people to invest in, more to remove excessively cumbersome bureaucracies, more to embrace private enterprise.  And as governments work to create conditions for entrepreneurship to thrive, they’ll find a ready partner in other nations with thriving entrepreneurial cultures, including my own.
The U.S. -- and I have with me one of the brightest people in our administration, a woman who has run a billion-dollar business, our Secretary of Commerce, who is with me today.  She understands that we, the United States, are anxious to participate.  Secretary Pritzker understands it’s part of her DNA what we have to do. 
The U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation has invested almost $700 million in Morocco.  And I’m pleased to announce that the MCC and Morocco are developing plans together as part of a broader investment to finance at least $50 million in public-private partnership to provide vocational and technical training to equip young Moroccans with the skills they need to compete globally.  (Applause.)
The United States is partnering with Volvo to establish a training academy here in Morocco with 150 students each year from Morocco, Cote d’Ivoire and Senegal, focusing on the maintenance of industrial and commercial equipment, putting them in a position to work for multinational companies or to start their own businesses.
In partnership with Spain, the United States will also provide a credit guarantee to help financing cutting-edge, cold storage facilities in the Tangier Med Port in Morocco, helping fill a critical gap in Morocco’s agricultural exports.
The most important steps are those that countries take themselves, though, to create the conditions where entrepreneurship and innovation are possible.  But where our help is wanted, we’re ready to partner. 
Let me tell you how. 
First, in some cases, we’re helping provide access to capital, the seed money required to start a business.  Our Overseas Private Investment Corporation through that the United States government’s financial institution has committed $3.2 billion under our administration to support micro-, small and medium-size entrepreneurs and enterprises in the developing world. 
In just the last quarter of 2013, the USAID, the Agency for International Development in Egypt issued nearly 13,000 loans to low-income entrepreneurs; two-thirds of whom were women.  But that’s not the most exciting part.  Over 85 percent of those loans have already been paid back by these women.  (Applause.) 
Through a program called Partnering to Accelerate Entrepreneurship, we’re bringing together incubators, investors, financial firms, worldwide financial and institutions to accelerate growth of startups.  They’ve already reached 200 startups and are mobilizing $80 million in private capital in their first year, 10 times the amount of government put into the program.
Second, in other cases, we’re providing training because many people have great ideas, but need advice on how to translate them into action.  At least year’s summit, the U.S. signed a partnership with the organization called UP Global, with a goal of holding what we call Startup Weekends in 1,000 cities around the world by 2016, events to equip aspiring entrepreneurs with the knowledge and resources.  In one year, UP Global thus far has held over 700 Startup Weekends in 700 cities, well beyond the course of the goal. 
Coursera, the online educational platform that’s breaking down barriers to higher education with over 800 courses, serving 10 million people.  Coursera has announced it will host high-quality, university-level entrepreneurship online courses available for free of charge. 
It won’t surprise you, we’re especially focused on women.  My wife yesterday spoke to a remarkably large group of talented women and entrepreneurs.  The promise is amazing.  And we, like other countries want to help.  We have trained over 200 women entrepreneurs each in Libya and in Tunisia.  Under the African Women’s Enterprise Program, we’re bringing together business women from across the sub-Saharan Africa for training and advocacy, and the chance to meet leaders in America like Secretary Pritzker and many other businesswomen and civil society.
Without empowering women, everything else we hope to achieve is exponentially harder.
Third, we’re using America’s global diplomatic and economic presence to convene, connect and champion entrepreneurs.  That includes conferences like this one, where people can share lessons, hear about what works elsewhere, network, pitch ideas.  Even the best ideas need the right outlets.  Lots of transformative ideas never see the light of day.  We want to change that.
And around the world, we’ll work to connect entrepreneurs with the right American companies.  For example, we have helped Palestinian software development house build partnerships with tech companies like Cisco, Microsoft, Intel, HP and Oracle.  We’ve named a Presidential Adviser for Global Entrepreneurship, well known and respected U.S. entrepreneurs and deployed them around the world to speak about what they do, how they do it, and why it matters.
And fourthly, most important of all, around the world, we’re helping create the conditions where entrepreneurship can thrive.  That includes fighting corruption, promoting transparency, helping countries create functioning capital markets, updating the regulations to favor entrepreneurship.
To give just one small example, in four Egyptian cities, the United States worked with the local chambers of commerce to create one-stop shops for business services that reduced the time it took to formally start a small business from 24 hours to one hour; seems inconsequential. 
But combined, all of these things, we talk about these different initiatives, they all make a difference.  But their collective impact is significant.
Today, we challenge the United States government’s top programs in entrepreneurship to spark a billion-dollar new investment [sic] in business and social entrepreneurship by 2018.  Half of it generated by women and young entrepreneurs.  We want others to join the effort.  We’re grateful that the Kauffman Foundation in the United States announced today it will contribute $100 million to the Global Enterprise Network and will be our first partner in getting to the billion-dollar goal.
All of our work to promote entrepreneurship aims to help people everywhere unlock their potential.  But for the United States, this effort is about finding common ground.
One person who understood the quest for common ground as well as any American was a Californian named Chris Stevens.  As a young man he volunteered to join the Peace Corps where he taught English from 1983 to 1985 in a small town in Atlas Mountains right here in Morocco.  He fell in love with your country, Mr. Leader.  He fell in love with the place and its Berber and Arab culture -- (applause) -- and made many, many friends here.
Morocco was the gateway to a life spent as a brave and intrepid diplomat for the United States.  Chris Stevens rose to become the U.S. Ambassador to Libya, and he gave his life in the line of duty, killed by violent extremists in 2012.  In celebration of Chris Stevens’ life, I’m proud to announce the J. Christopher Stevens Virtual Exchange Initiative.  The Stevens Initiative is multilateral.  (Applause.) 
It’s a multilateral, public-private endeavor designed in collaboration with the Stevens family.  It will seek to use the tools of technology to strengthen personal engagement between young people in the United States, North Africa and the Middle East and the rest of the world. 
It’s like a traditional exchange program, except it’s virtual.  Using communications technology that young people, who might otherwise never encounter -- where young people might otherwise never encounter one another will be able to do so virtually to better understand each other’s in a sustained and meaningful way.
The United States, Morocco, the governments of Algeria, Qatar, United Arab Emirates -- together have committed over $31 million over the next five years.  The initiative also involves the participation of a number of private-sector partners and foundations.  And we look forward to expanding these partnerships as this initiative grows.  The initiative will be formally kicked off with a pilot project early next year here in Morocco. 
And I want to conclude by one, thanking you for your patience, but also thanking you for your passion, your immense talent, your self-confidence, and your unbelievable hard work to realize your dreams.
I’m more optimistic today after serving a long in high public office than I have ever been.  I’m more optimistic today about the prospects of the world than I got elected as a 29-year-old kid to the United States Senate.  And a big part for that optimism are all of you assembled here in this room.  You have a chance, like no other generation in human history, to leave a more prosperous, more open, more dynamic and more just world than you found.
I’d like to quote a poem, if you’ll forgive me, from an Irish poet.  My colleagues always kid me back home saying I’m always quoting Irish poets because I’m Irish.  That’s not the reason.  I quote them because they’re the best poets in the world.  That’s why.  (Laughter and applause.)
But all kidding aside, one of my favorite poets who died recently was a man named Seamus Heaney.  And he wrote in a poem called “The Cure at Troy” the following stanza that I believe better describes the world that we are encountering right now than it did his Ireland in 1917 when he wrote the poem. And the stanza goes like this:
History teaches us not to hope on this side of the grave.  But then once in a lifetime, the tidal wave of justice rises up and hope and history rhyme.
We may not make it, but we collectively have a chance to make hope and history rhyme like it hasn’t in a thousand years.  The potential is immense.  The intellect is available.  And the technology accommodates it.
So I wish all you young entrepreneurs Godspeed; Godspeed because it’s more than what you’ll be able do for yourself.  It’s more what you’ll do for all of us.
God bless you all and may God protect our troops. (Applause.)
END 
11:02 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 19, 2014
Remarks As Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at the Global Entrepreneurship Summit Women’s Day
Marrakech, Morocco
Wednesday, November 19, 2014
It is so wonderful to be with so many amazing women who are realizing their potential. A month or so ago, I attended a book event – I’m an English professor, so I find a particular joy in attending the many book events offered in Washington, DC. Katty Kay and Claire Shipman recently penned “The Confidence Code” – some of you may know it. In preparing for this conference and thinking of what I would say to all of you I reached out to Claire Shipman. Here’s what she said:
“If you only remember one thing from this book, let it be this: when in doubt, act. Every piece of research we have studied, and every interview we have conducted, leads to the same conclusion: nothing builds confidence like taking action, especially when the action involves risk and failure. Risk keeps you on life’s edge. It keeps you growing, improving and gaining confidence. By contrast, living in a zone where you’re assured of the outcome can turn flat and dreary quickly. Action separates the timid from the bold.”
I can already tell that this group of women is not afraid of risk – you are women who take action. I am so pleased to be in Morocco, the Gateway to Africa. To his Royal Highness Mohammed VI, thank you for welcoming us to your magnificent country. It’s an honor to have Minister Delegate Mbarka Bouida here with us this evening. She represents Morocco on the world stage, and has been a key partner in making the Global Entrepreneurial Summit a great success.
This summer, I traveled to Zambia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and to Sierra Leone. The trip, in preparation for the US Africa Leaders Summit, focused on the importance of girls’ education and women’s participation in government, the economy, and civil society. Each time I have traveled to Africa, I have had the opportunity to meet with doctors and nurses, political leaders and entrepreneurs, teachers and students – all of whom share a common purpose: to give back, to build a stronger community, and to move their countries forward. And I have seen what a difference these individuals are making. Today, I would like to share a few stories from this trip that inspired me, stories of hope and opportunity, stories of a new Africa.
Our first stop in Africa was Zambia, where we visited a small, open-air health clinic that is making a big difference. Women in the United States are regularly tested for cervical cancer through a Pap smear, but in Zambia, doctors do not have access to the same type of medical equipment. So, a group of entrepreneurial physicians at the clinic in Zambia devised an ingenious procedure to detect cervical cancer using household vinegar, cotton swabs and a digital camera. The morning I was there, they screened more than 50 patients. One young woman I met at the clinic, Imogen, was diagnosed with cervical cancer after she was screened several years ago – she was devastated when she heard the diagnosis. But, after only six months of treatment, she returned to the clinic and was tested again. And her results came back negative. Imogen was proud to tell me that her story was not that uncommon. In fact, over 5,000 women have been screened at that health clinic and 90 percent of them have been cleared after just six months of treatment. For the past five years, Imogen has been volunteering at the health clinic, encouraging women in her community to go in for screenings and other health services, using her own experience to help others. That type of commitment and leadership is not just saving lives. It is creating a healthier community.
The next country we visited was the Democratic Republic of Congo. When we traveled to the western part of the DRC, we confronted another challenge for women: a restrictive law known as the Family Code. By law, women are prevented from working outside the home without their husband’s permission. In Kinshasa, I met with women entrepreneurs who are overcoming these obstacles and building successful businesses of their own. One of these women, Therese, is a savvy, resilient innovative engineer. After she earned her degree, she converted an outdoor restaurant with dirt floors into a business, manufacturing and selling traffic-directing robots. Why robots? Kinshasa has a population over 9 million people and virtually, literally, no traffic lights, which makes the streets incredibly dangerous – especially for children. Not only do the eight-foot tall, solar-powered metallic robots look impressive, but they actually work. People respect the robots, and the busy streets of Kinshasa are a little safer thanks to the ingenuity of this resourceful woman. Therese is not only breaking barriers for women in science and engineering, she is showing the power of technology to change the way we live and work.
Another woman who participated in the roundtable was Monique Giekes, an intellectual property rights attorney. Her husband threatened to lift employment approval shortly after the birth of her 4th child. She is now divorced. Monique is a lawyer working with Vlisco, a Dutch fabric manufacturer as their local distributor. As she established her successful business in Kinshasa she was moved by the stories of abused women in the eastern part of the DRC. I traveled to the Eastern Congo and saw firsthand what Monique saw – a world where two-thirds of the women have suffered sexual assault, women who were rebuilding their lives but needed job opportunities and training. So this business entrepreneur became a social entrepreneur – Monique opened a sewing school in Goma with her own money. Thirty woman were initially trained, and this number quickly doubled. I was so impressed by Monique, so moved by her commitment to change not only her own life but the lives of other women that I wanted to honor her in some way. So, the evening I met her, I made an unscheduled stop at her store and asked her to help me select a traditional Congolese dress to wear at the leaders’ dinner during the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit. In just a few days Monique and her staff produced an elegant turquoise wax print dress … the dress was a hit with the press, and in a small way, I was able to tell Monique’s story of how she was able to lift up other women.
Entrepreneurship can sound like a complicated, or an even an intimidating concept. In reality, it is what we women have always done – solving problems that need to be solved just as women like Imogen, Therese and Monique are doing. But they can’t do it alone. In the United States, we believe women’s empowerment is critical. So two years ago, we launched the Equal Futures Partnership. What began as a challenge to heads of state by President Obama in September of 2011 has now grown into a full-fledged multilateral initiative dedicated to breaking down barriers to women’s economic and political participation. The Equal Futures Partnership has grown to 28 members, which have made specific commitments to address discrimination against women in the political and economic spheres and to create opportunities for women to become leaders, mentors, entrepreneurs, and innovators. This effort has broadened the understanding that supporting women and girls is not about treating a vulnerable group, but rather about finally tapping into the potential of half the population.
The United States is committed to making sure girls and young women have the tools they need not just to survive – but to thrive in their communities. History and experience demonstrates that women of the Middle East and North Africa are critical change agents in society. And you are playing vital roles in shaping political transitions and building more stable societies.
Here in Morocco, women were at the forefront in working with King Mohammad VI to pass the revised Family Code which expanded legal rights to women within the framework of Islam. Earlier today, I visited the King’s Education Center for Women where I was able to meet with some impressive women who are working to improve their lives by furthering their education. I have seen that Moroccan women are not waiting for someone else to grant them the possibilities they seek, they are moving forward on their own.
The World Economic Forum shows that there is an increase in a country’s economic competitiveness when we decrease gender gaps in four key areas: health, education, politics and business. Nelson Mandela is famously remembered for saying, “Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.” I have spent the last thirty years as a professional educator so this quotation really inspires me. I continue to teach writing full-time at a community college just outside Washington, DC.
Community colleges are a lesser known, but a critical part of American’s higher education system. They are – as the name suggests – higher education institutions uniquely able to address the needs of their communities. At the community college where I teach, I started a women’s mentoring program. The program pairs women students over the age of 30 with women faculty. The goal of the program is more than simply helping them navigate their way to graduation. It is to set them on a lifelong path, where most of all, they have the confidence they need to succeed.
I am a teacher by training, but the truth is, everyone in this room is a teacher. No matter what you do, or where you come from, you all have an impact on the young people in your life. You all have the opportunity to shape young minds. We all have the obligation to share our knowledge, to lift up other women. It is up to every one of us to make it possible for every little girl who dares to dream big.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 22, 2014
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at Women in the World Texas on Military Families
Hi, everyone! Thank you Tina Brown for that kind introduction.
 
Before I begin, I want to remind everyone that October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month. For many of us, this is a year-round cause, and this battle is personal. We have seen a colleague or friend endure painful treatments. And not a day goes by when I do not think about the women I know whose lives were taken too early. 
 
Not only are we in this fight for the friends and loved ones we have lost, but for our sisters, daughters, and granddaughters, so they will have the tools they need to overcome breast cancer. So, I am asking all of you here today to continue dedicating your time—and your heart—to combating this disease.
 
As Second Lady, during my travels across the country and around the world, I have had the honor of meeting remarkable people who lift us up. Moms in their 30s, working full-time, going back to community college to complete their education so they can create a better life for their families. Incredible teachers who keep finding creative ways to inspire their students, until they have reached every last one of them. Military spouses going through deployment after deployment—moving countless times—stopping and starting their own careers without complaint.
 
What I have learned along the way, is that no matter how difficult the situation, there are exceptional individuals who step up to the challenge; who go above and beyond to make an even bigger difference in their community. I see that type of extraordinary commitment in our service members, veterans, and their families, and I am always inspired by their strength, resilience, and pride.
 
Today, I would like to share with you a story from January of 2012 when I traveled to Marine Corps Base, Camp Pendleton, in California where I met some truly impressive women. These women were members of the Marine Corps’ Female Engagement Teams—also known as FETs—and I watched some of their training.
 
Due to cultural restrictions, interacting with Afghan women is off-limits to male soldiers, so the FETs play a crucial role on the front lines. When these female Marines deploy to Afghanistan, they work to build relationships with Afghan women, to gain their trust and better understand their needs, and to help bring them access to health care and education.
 
But rather than tell you about what they do, I want to show it to you.
 
[PLAY VIDEO]
 
Back at Camp Pendleton, I had the opportunity to watch the FETs participate in training exercises to prepare them for what they might encounter in Afghanistan. What I saw was like a movie set—an entire Afghan village re-created, so realistic they pumped in the acrid smell of goat dung.
 
As part of the training exercise, I saw a simulated firefight in the middle of the village, where a woman, who was actually an amputee, hired for this exercise, was struck by an explosion. Blood spurted everywhere amidst the screaming of the injured villagers. I saw how the FET team members were trained to calm and care for the woman, and then talk to other women in the village about how to take care of such serious injuries.
 
After visiting Camp Pendleton, I invited a group of FETs that had returned from Afghanistan to my home to learn more about their experiences. One of them, Sergeant Sheena Adams, told me about a widowed Afghan woman—a mother of nine—whom she met who could barely feed her children. Due to cultural restrictions, this mother could not work outside the home. Yet Sergeant Adams found a way for this woman to earn an income, and it was pretty simple.  Using the mother’s baking talents and a son’s capacity to sell at a local bazaar, she helped the family create their own bread business.
 
Most of these service members were young women, just starting out their lives. What I saw from every single one of them was just how proud they were of their work. They were in harm’s way, like their male counterparts, yet they were doing something that none of their male counterparts could do—they were sharing knowledge and education with women, halfway around the world. Their service is truly remarkable.
 
We have asked much of service members and their families over the past decade. They sacrifice so much on behalf of our country. And a military family goes through a lot during deployment. There is a mixture of pride and concern that all military families share when a loved one is in harm’s way.
 
Several years ago, when I visited troops with my husband, Joe, at Camp Victory in Iraq, I spent time getting to know several of the women service members. All of them loved to serve their country and believed it was their greatest honor. But as moms, even with help from grandparents back home, it was hard for them to miss out on those important milestones in their kids’ lives—like taking them to their first day of school, whether it is kindergarten or college.
 
As you can imagine, it means so much to our service members when members of their community reach out to support military families during deployments. Sometimes it is the smallest things that matter most—like a neighbor helping to fix a leaky pipe, a friend bringing over a home-cooked meal, or your church including you in their prayers.
 
That is part of the reason First Lady Michelle Obama and I started Joining Forces. We wanted to show our appreciation for the incredible families across America who do so much for our country. We wanted to show our support not just with words, but with real, concrete opportunities in employment, education and wellness.
 
From the very beginning, Michelle and I both knew the American people would come out in full force. But I think it is safe to say we have been overwhelmed by the support shown for our service members, our veterans, and their families.
 
Businesses have stepped up: hiring more than half a million veterans and spouses in the past three years. CEOs and business owners have seen the value of the experiences and leadership that veterans and military spouses offer. And this past April, we announced the Veterans Employment Center—to connect transitioning service members, veterans, and their families to meaningful training and career employment opportunities.
 
States have stepped up: helping schools become more responsive to the unique needs of military families and children. 
 
If you have ever moved from one city to another, you know how stressful and challenging it can be. For our nation’s military members and their families, frequent moves are a fact of life. Each time a military family is transferred to a new location, their children have to leave their friends, try out for new sports teams, and adjust to a new school. On average, military children will attend six to nine different schools before graduating high school. Think about how much we are asking of our military and their families.
 
While military moms and dads have always worked hard to ensure a change in schools for their children is as smooth as possible, unexpected and unnecessary obstacles, like transferring records, securing spaces in courses, and staying included in extracurricular activities, have made the process more difficult than it should be.
 
In 2007, states stepped up to address school transition issues and developed the Interstate Compact. The Interstate Compact helps students transfer special education services, medical records, and participation in extracurricular activities. I am proud to say, as of three months ago, all 50 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Interstate Compact.
 
And thanks to Operation Educate the Educators, more than 100 colleges and universities are training thousands of future teachers to be prepared to identify the challenges military kids face. As a lifelong educator and a military mom, the way we reach out to military children in our classrooms is especially close to my heart. 
 
In short, America has stepped up to make a real difference. And I could go on with more about everything that has been done to support our service members, veterans, and their families. But going forward, we must challenge ourselves to do even more.
 
As more than a million service men and women end their military careers and transition back to civilian life, there is more that we can do together to welcome them home. In the end, that is really what Joining Forces is all about—connecting service members, veterans, and their military families with the resources available to them, and rallying our country to do even more. I believe that our military families deserve the very best efforts of each of us to show them how much we appreciate their service to our country, whatever that small act of kindness may be.
 
I want to leave you with a quote from President Kennedy:  “As we express our gratitude, we must never forget that the highest appreciation is not to utter words, but to live by them.”
 
Thank you, God bless our troops, and let’s keep the conversation going.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 24, 2014
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at the Institute for Career Development’s 2014 National Conference
Hi, everyone.  It is wonderful to be here with you in New Orleans.
Thank you Pete for that kind introduction, and it is great to see you again.  As Pete said, we first met two years ago when I toured Ivy Tech Community College in Indiana.
It is an honor to be invited here today by Tom Snyder, President of Ivy Tech, and Leo Gerard, President of the Steelworkers—they have both been such good friends to Joe and me.
I also want to congratulate Al Long for organizing the Institute for Career Development’s 20th National Conference—this conference is an incredible tribute to Lynn Williams’ lifelong efforts to build a better world.  So, thank you Al for all of your hard work.
I am honored to be here with all of you to discuss such an important topic—ensuring American workers have the education they need to secure good paying jobs to support their families.
This is an important topic for all workers, no matter what country you live in.  I just returned from a trip to Switzerland where I spoke at an international conference on higher education and job-training programs and I had the opportunity to tour a manufacturing plant that invests in quality job-training.  I learned that we all share the same challenges and opportunities.  And leaders from all across the world are trying to figure out how to best prepare workers for the intense competition of the 21st century economy. 
Equipping American workers with the skills they need to succeed in the global economy, is a top priority for President Obama and my husband Joe, the Vice President.
But I am not a politician.  I am not a researcher or an education policy expert.  I am an English professor.  I have taught in community colleges for 20 years, and still teach full-time at a community college near Washington, DC.  Education is my passion.
People sometimes ask why I choose to teach at a community college.  The answer is simple:  It is the students.  I love being in the classroom and seeing the difference I can make in the lives of my students.  My goal is to always give them confidence in their own abilities—because I know that confidence will carry them well beyond my classroom, in whatever they do.
In my classes, I find single parents who come to school in the evening, weary from a long day, yet eager to create a brighter future for their children.  I have taught veterans who return to the classroom to complete their higher education as they look to transition to civilian careers.  And I have seen workers who have gone as far as they can in their jobs—get the skills they need to reach the next level in their fields.
I know what happens in community college classrooms.  It is extraordinary.  I see it over and over because the students are so committed to furthering their education—they know it is the key to a better life for themselves and their families.
Community colleges lead the way in preparing graduates in the fields of green technology, healthcare, teaching, and information technology some of the fastest growing fields in America and the rest of the world.  In fact, half of the nurses in America are trained in community colleges.
I have always said that community colleges are one of America’s best-kept secrets.  They give people the tools they need to grow in a career they love.
Two years ago, I headed out on a community-college-to-career bus tour to learn more about innovative public-private workforce partnerships led by community colleges to train students for jobs that match the needs of employers in the region.  In two days, we traveled 800 miles through seven cities in five states, visiting some amazing, talented students, teachers and local leaders.  And at every stop, what I saw was exciting and inspiring.
Rather than tell you about the road trip, I want to show it to you.
[VIDEO]
Since then, I have continued to visit colleges across the United States to lift up these incredible programs and the people whose lives they change with our new Labor Secretary.
At one of the stops, I had the opportunity to visit Ivy Tech to learn more about the great partnership between the school and the steel industry.  That is where I met Janice and Kevin, both of whom were part of the Steelworker for the Future program.
Janice lost her job in 2008 during the worst recession since the great depression.  It was a challenging time for a lot of Americans, but Janice did not give up hope.  She went back to school, earned a degree in industrial technology, and was hired by U.S. Steel even before graduating from Ivy Tech.
Kevin went back to school at the age of 39.  He enrolled at Ivy Tech, did an internship with ArcelorMittal, and where upon graduation he was immediately hired full time as a maintenance mechanic.
I was also impressed by an enterprising senior at Whiting High School, named Benjamin who was part of the High School Steelworker Program, which gives high school students the chance to receive college credits for classes they take in industrial technology.  Benjamin earned 38 credits from Ivy Tech before graduating high school, and he was well on his way to realizing his goal of becoming a chemical engineer.
Whether it is workers like Janice and Kevin returning to the classroom to retool their skills for the jobs of today, or aspiring students like Benjamin who are receiving hands-on experience for the jobs of tomorrow, the training they receive at Ivy Tech is exactly what we need to replicate around the country to build the best-educated, most competitive workforce in the world.
The Obama-Biden Administration is doing its part to expand job-driven training programs so students and workers can acquire the education and skills they need to move into jobs that already exist in their communities.  By the end of this year, we will have invested nearly $2 billion into strengthening the partnership between community colleges, employers and the public workforce system to create pipelines of skilled workers.  Building those partnerships is essential to growing the economy, strengthening the workforce, and creating opportunities for working class families in the 21st century economy.
This all goes back to the fundamental belief of this administration—if you are ready to work, you should be able to find a job that fits your skills, or get trained with the skills you need for a better job.
It all starts with you.  You have been doing this for 25 years and you are the best at what you do.  But Lynn Williams would be the first to say, there is more work to be done—and there is always more work to be done.
We must break down common misconceptions, and shine a brighter light on what modern job-training education looks like.  We must lift up successful programs—like those offered through the Institute for Career Development—to match Americans who are ready to learn new skills, and who are ready to work, with good jobs that need to be filled right now.  Career pathway programs work for Steelworkers, and they can work for millions of more Americans. 
There is tremendous opportunity in what you are doing—not just for our students and for our workers—but for our country.  We all reap the benefits when our citizens are well-educated and well-trained.  It means that our economies are more vibrant and the future is brighter.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 16, 2014
Remarks as Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at the International Congress on Vocational and Professional Education and Training
Winterthur, Switzerland
Tuesday, September 16, 2014
  Hi, everyone!  Thank you Beatrice for that warm introduction. 
It is so great to be here with Ambassador Suzi LeVine—we are so grateful for her service here in Switzerland.
I am pleased to be joined by the United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of Labor Eric Seleznow.
I am honored to be here with all of you at this international conference to discuss such an important topic—ensuring that students and workers have the skills they need to secure good jobs and succeed in the global economy. 
This is a top priority for President Obama and my husband Joe, the Vice President of the United States.
But I am not a politician.  I am not a researcher or an education policy expert.  I am an English professor.  I have taught in community colleges for 20 years, and still teach full-time at a community college near Washington, DC.  Education is my passion.
People sometimes ask why I choose to teach at a community college.  The answer is simple:  It is the students. 
I love being in the classroom and seeing the difference I can make in the lives of my students.  My goal is always to give them confidence in their own abilities—because I know that confidence will carry them well beyond my classroom, in whatever they do.
In my classes, I find single parents who come to school in the evening, weary from a long day, yet eager to create a brighter future for their children.
I have taught veterans who return to the classroom to complete their higher education as they look to transition to civilian careers.
And I have seen workers who have gone as far as they can in their jobs—get the skills they need to reach the next level in their fields.
I know what happens in community college classrooms.  It is extraordinary.
I see it over and over because the students are so committed to furthering their education—they know it is the key to a better life for themselves and their families.
Community colleges are as the name suggests—higher education institutions that are uniquely able to address the needs of their communities.  They are a place where students can get the skills and education they need to succeed, and get a good-paying job to support their families.
In the United States there are almost 1,200 community colleges.  They serve almost 12 million students, or nearly half of all U.S undergraduate students.
Community colleges lead the way in preparing graduates in the fields of green technology, healthcare, teaching, and information technology some of the fastest growing fields in America and the rest of the world.
In fact, half of the nurses in America are trained in community colleges.  
Quite simply, these schools are providing students with an opportunity to learn the skills they need to compete in the global economy.
Two years ago, I headed out on a community-college-to-career bus tour to learn more about innovative public-private workforce partnerships led by community colleges to train students for jobs that match the needs of employers in the region.
In two days, we traveled 800 miles—or nearly 1,300 kilometers—through seven cities in five states, visiting some amazing, talented students, teachers and local leaders. 
Rather than tell you about the road trip, I want to show it to you.
[SHOW VIDEO]
Since then, I have continued to tour the United States with Secretary of Labor Tom Perez.
I have always said that community colleges are one of America’s best-kept secrets.  They help people get good-paying jobs, and give them the tools they need to grow in a career they love. 
Today, more than 800 schools in the United States are using an innovative career training program to align curriculum with the needs of employers.
This gives students the opportunity to learn the skills they need to move into jobs that already exist in their communities.
The Obama-Biden Administration is doing its part to bolster the program and spur new partnerships.  By the end of this year, we will have invested nearly $2 billion into strengthening the linkage between community colleges and employers to create pipelines of skilled workers. 
As the U.S. economy continues to grow, and global competition intensifies, community colleges will become even more crucial to American prosperity. 
That is why in January of this year, President Obama asked my husband Joe to lead a review of the job-training programs in the United States.
What he found is that matching ready-to-work employees to in-demand jobs works best when employers partner with educators to define needed skills, shape training programs, and invest in apprenticeships and on-the-job training.
As a result, the Administration is now taking action to make our job-training programs more effective.
And, more businesses and education systems in the U.S. are teaming up to replicate successful training strategies.
One of those strategies is increasing the opportunity for apprenticeships.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to visit the Bühler plant in Uzwil to see firsthand the Swiss apprenticeship program.
I was impressed to learn that nearly 80 percent of apprentices continue to work at Bühler after their training, and that other companies in the region are able to take advantage of the program, creating an eco-system of high quality skilled workers.
As we look to improve job-training education in the United States, we will put a greater emphasis on apprenticeships.  They are a tried-and-true workforce development global strategy.
State governments and education professionals in the United States are already learning lessons from the unique Swiss model.
For example, the California State Senate has developed a new program called the Career Pathways Trust—a $250 million competitive grant program to encourage more partnerships between schools and the private sector.
In the United States, we have 375,000 Registered Apprentices.  We need to add 2.5 million more next year to compete with Great Britain and 7 million more to compete with Germany. 
To get anywhere near those numbers, we need to do a better job of breaking down some common misconceptions, and shine a brighter light on what modern apprenticeships look like.
Consequently, we created the Registered Apprenticeship College Consortium—a partnership among community colleges and employers that makes it possible for apprentices to transfer college credits they earn to any community college in the consortium.
Over 30 colleges and 500 apprenticeship programs have applied to join.
And this fall, we are making an historic investment of 100 million dollars to scale up programs that work, and to create new opportunities for companies to adopt this tried-and-true strategy.
Apprenticeships provide a career pathway for workers, setting them on an upward trajectory for life, and they are a great return-on-investment for employers.
They also demonstrate the benefit of sharing best practices to better prepare our students for the jobs of today and tomorrow.  That is exactly what all of you are doing here.
No matter what country you live in, young people are trying to figure out where they fit into the intense competition of the global economy.  And leaders are trying to figure out how to prepare the next generation for the jobs of tomorrow.
As President Obama has said, “In a 21st century economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, education is the single best bet we can make.”
We all reap the benefits when our citizens are well-educated and well-trained.  It means that our economies are more vibrant and the future is brighter. 
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 02, 2014
Remarks As Prepared for Delivery by Dr. Jill Biden at Shalom Community School in Zambia
Lusaka, Zambia
Wednesday, July 2, 2014
Hi, everyone! Thank you, Martha, for that great introduction! Dr. Scott, thank you for joining me today. I can see very quickly that we share many of the same passions.
Provincial Education Officer Ngosa Korati and District Education Board Secretary Ruth Phiri – thank you for honoring us with your presence today. Head Teacher George Kaamba and students – thank you for such a warm welcome!
It’s a pleasure to be here at Shalom Community School and to meet all of you – and to be joined by Administrator Raj Shah, head of the U.S. Agency for International Development, Cathy Russell, the U.S. Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women’s Issues and David Young, our Charge d’Affaires in Zambia.
I don’t want to keep you from your studies so I just want to say a few quick words. I am very lucky – as Second Lady of the United States, I have the opportunity to travel all around the world.
And as a lifelong teacher, one of my favorite things to do when I travel is to meet students, like all of you.
What all of you are doing – putting your education first – is so important. By focusing on your studies, you are creating a lifetime of opportunities for you and your families.
So on my trip over the next few days, one of the areas I will be focusing is education. 
But I will also be looking at how women’s participation in government, the economy, and civil society can accelerate economic development, improve health and educational outcomes, and foster peace and security.
The United States is committed to making sure girls and young women have the tools they need to not just survive – but to thrive in their communities. 
Through partnerships with Zambia and other African governments, we hope to improve women’s lives through educational opportunities, access to healthcare, combatting gender-based violence, and empowering women – because a nation cannot reach its full economic potential until its women reach theirs.
Many countries around the world now recognize that bringing more women into the workforce is key to economic growth, productivity and prosperity.
From Japan to Italy to Mexico and certainly in the United States, governments and business leaders understand that we cannot afford to leave growth on the table and are pursuing new policies to make sure that women can enter, stay and contribute to the economy.
First and foremost, this means making sure that all students have access to quality education. 
I have seen firsthand what a difference this can make all over the world.
A few years ago I had the incredible opportunity to visit a school for girls in Kenya where I saw how a strong educational foundation can provide a sense of hope – of normalcy – and the chance at a better life.
Last year, I visited a local Muslim girls’ school in India where I will never forget how enthusiastic they were to learn, and just how proud they were to show me their school. I already have the same feeling from all of you!
And today, I’m proud to stand with Dr. Scott, your Second Lady, who has been a leading voice in Zambia to raise awareness of gender violence and girls’ education.
Earlier this year, Dr. Scott’s efforts brought together thousands of young people, the First Lady, celebrities and the UN, for a “Bring Back Our Girls” event to show solidarity for the kidnapping of young Nigerian girls from their school.
The horrific event in Nigeria has rightfully captured attention and anger everywhere.
Their story reminds us that girls around the globe risk their lives to pursue their ambitions – and together, we must do more to ensure that all girls and boys have the opportunities everyone deserves:
We all want the opportunity to pursue our dreams and be treated with respect – regardless of our gender;
We all want to have access to resources to help us stay healthy;
And we all want to feel safe and secure as we pursue our dreams.
Education makes all of those possible.
I’ve been a teacher for over 30 years.  I love helping students – navigate their future and see it grow bright before their eyes. 
And that’s exactly what’s happening to all of you.
Because of the education you are getting, you are being set on a lifelong path where most of all, you have the confidence and tools you need to succeed.
Over the next few days, I look forward to learning more about what is happening here in Zambia, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and in Sierra Leone.
Next month, the United States will host the first U.S.- Africa Leaders Summit where I hope to share what I learn during this trip, including your story – a story of an aspiring generation prying open the doors of opportunity to all, including women who want to participate in your government, help grow and drive your economy, and to foster peace and security in your country and throughout Africa.
Your generation will write a new chapter in the story of Africa—one of vibrant, peaceful societies – where the problems of the past are a distant memory – where young Africans are enjoying opportunities undreamt of by their parents and grandparents.
Where the sky is the limit and growth and progress are happening fast.
That Africa is already emerging, year by year.
Zambia is part of that story. 
And if you work hard and study hard, that will be your story, too.  
As Nelson Mandela said:  “Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.”
You may ask yourself: how does the life of one person – me – fit into that big picture? 
If you change one classroom, pretty soon that classroom has changed one school. That school has changed a village, that village has changed a province and that province has changed a country. 
None of that happens if it doesn’t start somewhere. 
It starts with you, making a difference in your own life. Your own school. Your own village. 
Thank you so much for opening your school to me.  You all are my inspiration and I’m excited to see what you do in the future.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 20, 2014
Remarks to the Press with Q&A by Vice President Joe Biden in Guatemala
Residence of the United States Ambassador
Guatemala City, Guatemala
4:37 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, folks.  Thank you for waiting.  I appreciate it. 
I’ve just finished, as most of you know, a day of meetings, and I would say very constructive meetings here in Guatemala.  And I wanted to speak about one issue in particular that brought me here.  I also wanted to thank the chargé for accommodating us and accommodating the civil society groups -- and the First Lady of Guatemala as well.
The United States, to state the obvious, is greatly concerned by the startling number of unaccompanied minors that -- children and teenagers who are making a very perilous journey through Central America to reach the United States.  These are some of the most vulnerable migrants that ever attempt -- and many from around the world attempt -- to come to the United States.  They’re among the most vulnerable.  And the majority of these individuals rely -- we estimate between 75 and 80 percent -- rely on very dangerous, not-nice, human-smuggling networks that transport them through Central America and Mexico to the United States.
These smugglers -- and everyone should know it, and not turn a blind eye to it -- these smugglers routinely engage in physical and sexual abuse, and extortion of these innocent, young women and men by and large.
And they profit from the misery of these children and teenagers; these desperate, desperate young people.  And the numbers are growing at an alarming -- the U.S. Department of Homeland Security apprehended 24,000 unaccompanied minors in the year from October of 2012 to the year -- to October, 2013.  In that one year, they apprehended 24,000 unaccompanied minors at our border. 
In eight months since that time, the number has jumped to 47,000 additional unaccompanied minors.  We’re also seeing a rise -- generally mothers, who are traveling with their children from Central -- Mexico to the United States. 
So I met today with the Presidents of Guatemala, El Salvador, and the Honduran Coordinator General, the Mexican Secretary of Government.  And President Obama had a chance to discuss the situation with Mexican President Peña Nieto last night, and I spoke at some length today on Air Force Two to the President of Honduras, President Hernández of Honduras.  And we had a lengthy conversation about the issue.
We all agree -- people that are meeting today, the President Peña Nieto, President Hernández and myself -- everyone agreed, there was unanimity that the current situation is untenable and unsustainable.  We also agreed that this is a matter of shared responsibility -- not just the United States, but shared responsibility of every Central American country and Mexico.  And I will address in a minute, but we’re all committed to take both immediate steps in the crisis and long-term challenges we are -- that we’re going to have to meet.
I’m going to address the steps we’re taking on the immediate crisis in a moment, but in the meantime, here in Central America, I want to talk first about our work together to give citizens in Central America security and -- so that they can thrive -- and not feel the need or be compelled to try to get to the United States of America, or Mexico, for that matter.
I can’t imagine, I can’t imagine the desperation that leads a parent in Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, to put their son or daughter in the hands of these criminals to take them on a perilous, hundred- and in some case thousand-mile journey to the border of the United States.
As I was on the plane, I read -- I got a briefing from Homeland Security.  Just last night, they apprehended women and children hiding in the thicket on the Rio Grande who were suffering from dehydration and 100-degree heat.  God only knows what would happen if they had been left there.
There is nothing humane about what these traffickers are doing.  And I can’t imagine a parent, the desperation they must feel to hand your daughter over to one of these thugs, these criminals.  But it’s clear we have to deal with the root causes, the root causes are what drives people -- what would drive a 17-year-old, what would drive a mother, a father to give a 10-year-old to these coyotes. 
Many are driven by lack of physical security.  The United States toward that end provides -- plans to provide 160 million more dollars this year for the Central American Regional Security Initiative to help countries improve citizen safety, governance and border security.
The United States will also move forward on projects totaling $83.5 million this year.  In addition to improve citizen safety in Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras.  This includes over $40 million over the next several years to Guatemala to target hotspot communities to reduce the risks, the risk factors for youth involved in gangs and drugs.
I presented today a map to all the leaders showing a direct correlation between the number of unaccompanied minors and where they came from.  It directly correlates to the most dangerous cities in Central America.  You can just map it.  It’s clear.  And so as I said, it’s incredibly important that we do our part to provide this kind of funding.
And in the case of Guatemala, it’s a $40 million additional commitment to target those hot spots to reduce the risk factors for youth involvement in gangs.
Others are driven to emigrate by lack of economic opportunity.  That's been a story.  Long before narcotrafficking -- a major problem in Central America, there was still tens of thousands of people over time -- Central America to the United States.  So it’s not just -- it’s not just narcotraffickers and violence. 
That's why in addition to our longstanding efforts to increase trade and regional economic integration, USAID will create a new public-private partnership through the Global Development Alliance mobilizing the expertise of businesses and local civil society to help reach at-risk youth.
I met today -- and I want to personally thank the First Lady of Guatemala for helping put this together -- I met today with representatives from civil society here in Guatemala to talk about how we can work together to address these challenges. 
Now that sounds like sort of foreign policy State Department speak, doesn't it?  Meet the challenges.  We talked specifically about everything -- how to create boys and girls clubs, how to deal with violence against women, how to vet police forces so their corruption is eliminated.  There are concrete things, and we stand ready to help do, to build institutions here in this country and in the rest of Central America.
But the decision lies in the hands of the leaders of each of these countries.  Civil society has a critical role to play in these issues, and they're showing real leadership.
No fundamental social change occurs merely because government acts.  It’s because civil society, the conscience of a country begins to rise up and demand -- demand -- demand change.
And the leaders I met with today in the other room are impressive, these members heading up various organizations.  Civil society, as I said, has a critical role, and I agreed as I left with each of the members to send them the blueprints that helped us to give them some idea.  We don't have all the answers, but to give them some help as to how we went about dealing with organized crime, violent gangs, providing an alternative for young children who are looking for a way out.
Even as we work closely with the countries of the region, the United States is also working urgently to address the issue at our border.  On June 1, President Obama directed the Secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh Johnson, to bring to bear the assets of the entire federal government of the United States of America.  Secretary Johnson appointed one of the most competent managers that I’ve worked with in my entire career the head of the so-called FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, a man named Craig Fugate, has an impeccable record, to coordinate this comprehensive government-wide response.
And right now Secretary Johnson and Cecilia Muñoz, the President’s domestic policy adviser, are on the Texas-Mexico border, getting a firsthand look at this crisis.  It’s not their first visit, but that's where they are as I speak.  Their trip coincides with new steps announced today by the U.S. Department of Justice and Homeland Security to enhance enforcement and removal proceedings.
Because one of the things we all talked today in our private meeting with the heads of state and their representatives, everyone agreed that these children should be reunited by their -- with their parents, with their parents in the country from which they came.  Everyone agreed to that.  You’re clearly not going to send a child back to a circumstance where there is no one there for them.  But we do intend, and everyone agreed, it is necessary to put them back in the hands of a parent in the country from which they came.
Look, as I said, the Department of Justice, Homeland Security, this is what they're doing.  They are enhancing the enforcement and removal proceedings because those who are pondering risking their lives to reach the United States should be aware of what awaits them.  It will not be open arms.  It will not be come on -- it will be, we’re going to hold hearings with our judges consistent with international law and American law, and we’re going to send the vast majority of you back.
We’re moving forward with a plan to surge government enforcement resources to increase our capacity to detain individuals humanely, and adults traveling with the children, to handle immigration court hearings in cases where these hearings are necessary, to do it as quickly as possible.  In addition, we’re sending immigration judges, attorneys to represent these young people and families with young people, and asylum officers.  They have a right under our law to make the case -- make the case that we’re here because we’re avoiding persecution.  We’re avoiding something will physically affect our safety. 
They're being assigned to process cases of immigrants apprehended at the border who are claiming credible fear, and are eligible to apply for asylum.  But that decision will be made quickly, fairly, with -- but it will be made quickly.  We are committed to complying with the law and all international relevant standards.  That's how we do it.
But we are prioritizing the need to resolve these cases as quickly as position in light of the humanitarian crisis caused by the -- number of crossings.  Make no mistake, once an individual’s case is fully heard, and if he or she does not qualify for asylum, he or she will be removed from the United States and returned home.  Everyone should know that.
We expect many of the recent immigrants -- migrants I should say to fall into this category.  My guess is a vast majority, and they will be going home.
Coming out of the meetings today, we will be working to do all of this in coordination with our partners.  El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras have all agreed to send additional consular officers from Guatemala, from Honduras, from El Salvador, send them to the U.S. border so that we can more quickly and humanely identify unaccompanied children and process their individual removal.
The United States is going to provide almost $10 million -- $9.6 million immediately to help the Central American governments receive, reintegrate and care for their citizens repatriated from the United States. 
Finally and critically, all of us in our meetings today agreed to work to counter and correct the misinformation smugglers are propagating about U.S. immigration policy, and discourage families from sending their children on this perilous journey.
Look, the President of Guatemala announced, if memory serves me, that beginning in July, the first two weeks in July, there will be a major initiative in the media and in the public space here in Guatemala to make it clear what the facts are.  The same commitment was made by the President of El Salvador and the Honduran representatives.  Mexico is already doing this.  We expect them to do it.  We will hold them to that commitment.  We’re convinced they will do it.
These minors that have recently come are not eligible -- they are not eligible to what’s referred to as deferred action.  A deferred action process.  Not if they arrived in the past seven years.  Let’s get this straight.  Any minor who arrived in the past seven years is not eligible for deferred action.  No new immigrant since 2011 is eligible for the earned citizenship provisions proposed in the comprehensive U.S. immigration reform pending before Congress.  Right, wrong, or indifferent -- those are the facts. 
And putting children in the hands of smugglers and these thugs and drug traffickers is a reckless and dangerous undertaking for any parent to do.  We will all be actively engaged in communicating this message in the United States, in Mexico, in Guatemala, in Honduras, and in El Salvador. 
You know, as the world knows, my country welcomes legal immigration.  As a matter of fact, we just agreed to take 70,000 refugees from other parts of the world.  We are not an ungenerous country when it comes to dealing with the plight and the dire circumstances of people in other parts of the world.  In fact, we consider -- we consider the welcoming of legal immigration a source of strength.  It’s why America is so strong.  It’s the constant infusion of new blood, new ideas, new peoples.  And by the way, of the 11 million women and men living in the shadows of American society, and children, about 35 percent of these are Asian.  This is not all Latin America, it is not all Hispanic.  It represents all corners of the world, including Ireland and Africa, and other places.
So, folks, look, we believe these people, the 11 million in the shadows who have been there for a long time, deserve the dignity of being recognized and given a path -- citizenship that they have to earn:  paying back taxes -- language -- a whole range of other requirements.  But we believe they have a right to be put on that path.
We think it’s a moral imperative, but it’s also in the overwhelming naked self-interest of the United States.  Every study shows they will contribute over $1.7 trillion dollars to economic growth in America, to the growth in the GDP.  It’s estimated the GDP, if memory serves me, will grow -- I think it’s -- over the next 20 years because of this.  It solidifies our Social Security system.  It does not bankrupt it.  It reduces our deficit, it does not increase it.  So there’s both moral and practical reasons why this should happen.
But when children travel hundreds of miles to reach the United States without their families in the hands of criminals in the 21st century, that’s a tragedy we all must take responsibility for -- the country from which they come, and the country to which they are headed.  I want to thank the leaders of Guatemala, El Salvador, Mexico and Honduras for working with me, for working with the United States to take this issue on that affects us all.
To my great -- how can I say it?  To my great relief and thanks, they all agreed to take on specific responsibilities that will help us solve this problem.  We anticipate they will keep those responsibilities because we’re devoting significant resources to this effort.  And following these meetings, we’re looking to see what more we can do.  We’ve agreed to all stay in contact.  And God willing, we can solve this together.
I’m late, but you’ve been patient.  I’ll be happy to take a few questions from you if you have any.
Q    (Inaudible.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Well -- been dealing with this issue for a long, long time.  I mean, for two decades.  The thing that was most welcome and appreciated, there were no demands.  This was not a circumstance in which, like it used to be 15 years ago, where we’d sit in a meeting and it was all, it’s your fault, United States, we demand you do the following.  There were no demands.  There was an absolute recognition that there was a shared responsibility here.  They talked among themselves about what more we have to do.  I will not identify it because it was a private meeting but I guarantee you that two of the countries’ leaders said, we have to do more, we’re not -- these communities, we’re not cleaning up our institutions quickly enough. 
It was an interesting thing to have an outsider sit in and hear them talk about, in a constructive way, what they’re not doing.
It is true they’re very concerned about family reunification, but they understand that that’s what the immigration bill does.  It provides a legal way to do that.  And when the issue was raised about -- and it was raised, well, again, I guess I shouldn’t identify without their permission, but you can go check -- when the issue was raised about reunification, it was clear that -- and they talked among themselves and to me -- that they had an obligation to identify the parent -- country who sent the child, and return the child to that parent.
There was hope that, if that wasn’t done, they’d be returned to the parent if they had one in the United States.  But the interesting thing to me is that this is the first time -- and I look to my senior staff here in the State Department -- I don’t recall in the past where this has been so open and fulsome about the shared responsibility.
I acknowledged, by the way, and I’ll say it again, we have a responsibility.  The United States has a responsibility and it goes to the second part of your question.  There is no doubt on the minds of any of those leaders that we are treating these young people humanely at the border.  They understood that the influx was beyond our capacity initially to absorb. 
One of the leaders said, we don’t want them in cots in look-like cells, but we know what you’re doing.  We talked about it, what the American government is doing to provide army barracks for them to be in.  If they’re good enough for our military, they’re good enough for these young people.  And how we’re doing everything in our power to deal with their immediate needs.  And I invited them to come and see for themselves.  The First Lady is going to see.  Others have already gone. 
And to the best of my knowledge, and I stand corrected if I’m mistaken, but there wasn’t one single suggestion of a single example of a child not being cared for; or us attempting to care for a child -- one of the leaders with whom I met today said, one of our problems is you treat them so well they don’t want to come home to the circumstance they left.  Let me say that again.  One of the leaders I met with said, you are treating them so well they don’t want to come home to the circumstance they left.
I hope that answers your question.  I know of no assertion or accusation that we’re not meeting every international and national standard, going out of our way to treat these young people and the families accompanied with a minor fairly, humanely, and put them in circumstances that if, God forbid, our children were in that circumstance, we’d want them in.  I’m proud of my country, and the way they’re handling this on that score.
Yes, madam.
Q    (Inaudible.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Do we have a translator?  Sorry.  There you are, man.  He’s the best, by the way.
Q    (Inaudible.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Both very good questions.  Both warrant at least an answer that would take an hour.
But I will be very straightforward with you.  The truth is all the causes are part of the problem.  The truth is the economic deprivation that exists in so many parts of Central America is a driving force.  To deny that would deny history.  It’s always been a driving force.  You know -- I don't want to put you on the spot.  You know it.  Everyone here knows it.  That's one issue.  And it is exacerbated recently in some of the countries in question.
Two, violence is a part.  It’s real.  As I said the correlation between -- it’s not coincidental.  These young people unaccompanied are coming from the areas -- I wish I had an extra one of those maps to leave with you to make a copy of, but there is a direct correlation between the -- most dangerous, according to you, the Guatemalan authorities, the Honduran authorities, and the El Salvadoran authorities.  They say internally these are our most dangerous cities, our most dangerous places.  There is a direct correlation between those dangerous places and where the unaccompanied youth are coming from.  The vast majority -- you can just overlay it. 
And they have a map.  Maybe we can somehow get you a copy.  But we have a map that shows -- just overlays exactly that, how many people, how many unaccompanied came from this city, and how dangerous this city is.  The more dangerous the city, the more people are coming.  So obviously that plays a part.
There is also a piece that it relates to -- I’m sure some of it relates to the desire to get -- to reunify, or in the first instance gain access to -- I’m sure that is part of it.  There’s been too much time and effort made by the smuggling rings to say, mama, give me your baby.  I’ll take him, her to the border.  She will be able to get a pass. 
Matter of fact, the reason why we know some of that is occurring when they get to the border, taken in and given immediate shelter, they get a notice that they have to appear.  They think that is a pass, some of them.  Or they think, oh, I got the pass.  I’m in.  It’s simply not true.
So I’m reluctant -- because I want to be completely honest with you -- to ascribe a percentage to any of one these.  But there’s no serious person who would suggest that violence and economic deprivation are not a major reason for this happening -- a major reason.
Because well before there was any talk about the immigration law, there were still 24,000 people coming, for example in the year before.  So anyway, as the -- all of the above.
Your second question, what can we do about that?  What we can do about is I hope what I laid out.  We can, A, first make clear in each of our countries in an unrelenting way, not just with a public service announcement, that there is no free pass, that none of these children or women bringing children will be eligible under the existing law in the United States of America.  Number one.
Number two, we are saying we do know that this has to do with violent crime and with drugs and organized crime and corruption in your societies among police, among officials.  And we’re saying, we are prepared.  We’ve given you -- we’ve given.  We’ve provided literally over time well over $200 million to say, here, $160 million this year.  This is what you can do to deal with violence.  We’re prepared to work with you.  It could be more.  I’m not suggesting that solves the problem.  But I am suggesting it impacts on the problem.
The third thing we’re doing is we are continuing to have -- provide economic assistance.  USAID is here doing everything from working with farmers to working with small business enterprises to try to get them up and running to be of assistance -- not only financial assistance, but to provide guidance as to how to change the circumstance.
I met with a young man in civil society.  I’m embarrassed I cannot remember his name now -- but who works in the public-private sector here in Guatemala with businesses that understand this is a problem, and they're joining with government, and the use of the funding we’re providing to help try to change the economic circumstances.
So we’re doing all three.  There is no single solution, and it’s not going to happen overnight.  It’s not going to happen overnight.  But ultimately.
The last thing I told my interlocutors today, my fellow leaders of their respective countries is one of the things I discussed on my trip to Brazil and to Colombia was how can the major economies of South America and the major economies of North America help provide Central America becoming a bridge between the two of them, greatly raising the economic -- in Central America.
With regard to Colombian President Santos, who is an old friend reelected recently, we talked about the change in the election in Panama.  The new President of Panama has decided rightly in my view that he is now prepared to provide Panama as the transit system for the generation of electricity from Colombia all the way through Central America, and from Mexico down.  That could be -- to use the vernacular, that could be a game changer.  That generates a circumstance when foreign direct investment is considering being here, they not only consider the issue of corruption, the issue of safety, they also consider access to energy.  So there are larger, longer term, major initiatives that if we continue to work together from Canada, Mexico and the United States, Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, there is a possibility -- not a hundred years from now, but in the next three to 10 years -- to begin to change the economic circumstances and opportunity here in Central America.  That's longer term.
But if you don't look down the road, if you don't plan for the future, you never get there.  Thank you all so very much for you time.  I really appreciate it.  Thank you.
END
5:15 P.M (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 June 05, 2014
Remarks by Secretary of Education Arne Duncan and Dr. Biden
Roosevelt Room
  11:07 A.M. EDT
      SECRETARY DUNCAN:  We just appreciate you folks making an effort.  It’s a really interesting group of people; different backgrounds, different experiences, but with a sort of shared passion to figure out what we as a country can do to make college both more accessible and more affordable.  
      And what you all recognize is that going to college has never been more important than it is today; unfortunately, it’s also never been more expensive.  And somehow we have to find ways to reduce that.  And we’re working on lots of stuff, as are many of you, and give you -- have you give us your best thinking -- obviously, if you tell us what we need to hear, not what we want to hear.  And the President, the Vice President, the First Lady, Dr. Biden, this is one where -- the highest levels of the White House.  It’s this huge passion and commitment.  
  As Dr. Biden said, she has been teaching for a couple of decades now.  That’s where her heart is.  (Laughter.)  That’s where her passion is.  She hasn’t taken the easiest of jobs.  She’s taught in therapeutic situations, she’s taught in prisons, she teaches at a community college.  This is her passion.  This is her life’s work.  As I always say, she could be spending all her time at fancy parties and fancy lunches, and she teaches students every single day.
  So we’re so lucky to have someone of her passion and commitment work on this every single day.  I’ll turn it over to her then we’ll go to Dexter, and we’ll just sort of open it up and get folks thinking.
  Dr. Biden.
      DR. BIDEN:  Thanks.  I leave all the fancy parties to Arne.  (Laughter.)  
      SECRETARY DUNCAN:  I wish.  I wish.  (Laughter.)
     DR. BIDEN:  Well, hello, everyone.  And it’s my pleasure to welcome everybody here to the White House.  And as a lifelong educator -- I like that a little better.  (Laughter.)
      SECRETARY DUNCAN:  I’ll work it out.  I owe you one.  (Laughter.) 
      DR. BIDEN:  Anyway, I’ve seen firsthand the power, really, of college education, and -- as well as many barriers to success, as Arne talked about.  And as I said, I teach full time at a community college in Northern Virginia.  And really, my students are juggling a lot.  They’re working full time, and balancing family and community obligations, along with taking classes.  But I see over and over, they are so committed to furthering their education because they know it’s the way to a better life for themselves and for their families.
      And that’s why college affordability is so critical.  And we need to make sure that there’s an affordable path to higher education for all, and not just a luxury for a few.  And that’s why affordable student loans are essential.
     And over the past three decades, the average tuition at a public four-year college has more than tripled.  The average undergraduate student who borrows for college graduates with almost $30,000 of debt.  So we all agree -- all of us -- that we need to do more.  And I’m proud to be part of an administration that has made college affordability a priority, reforming the student loan system and doubling the Pell grants. 
  But we all know that we need to do more to make college affordable, and that’s why I’m so pleased to announce that the Senate Democrats are working on a proposal that would help more young people afford to repay college debt.  We will also hear from -- this issue from the President on Monday.  
     So together, we can do more to lift this burden off our students.  I thank you all for being here, and I really look forward to hearing your stories.
                              END
    
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 31, 2014
Commencement Address By Vice President Joe Biden
The University of Delaware
Newark, Delaware
9:16 A.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, Delaware!  (Applause.)  It’s good to be home.  It’s good to be home.  Thank you, thank you, thank you.  It really is good to be home.
Dr. Grasso, thank you for that kind introduction -- and, Mr. President, Chairman of the Board and members of the board, distinguished faculty, alumni, elected officials that are here.
Moms, dads, grandparents, brothers, sisters, husbands, wives -- you all look happier today than the graduates do.  (Laughter.)  And I want you to know there’s a good reason for that, graduates.  All your parents get a pay raise today.  (Laughter.)  No tuition.  (Laughter and applause.)  Congratulations.
Class of 2014, we keep saying we stand to recognize you.  But I think it’s about time you all get out of your chairs and thank your parents.  (Applause.) 
And I want to say congratulations to all the veterans who are graduating today and all those who are going to be commissioned in the United States military.  (Applause.)  Will you join -- would all of you, please stand?  All those veterans and all those joining, please stand.  (Applause.)  You’re about the join the finest group of warriors the world has ever seen.  And that is not hyperbole.  That's a fact.
So, ladies and gentlemen, as I said, it’s a delight to be here to congratulate the Class of 2014.  I’m so proud of you.  We’re all so proud of you.  And as I said, it’s great to be home, back at my alma mater.  My sister received her degree from here.  My wife, Jill, received her undergraduate and doctorate degree from here.  And an awful lot of Bidens and an awful lot of my wife’s family also went to the university.
But the reason I’m so excited to be here, particularly standing exactly where I am, Coach Raymond, where are you?  Coach, stand up.  Will you please?  (Applause.)  Now, Coach Raymond -- I came to Delaware to play football.  I didn't do much of it.  (Laughter.)  But I came to play.
Coach, I want you to observe -- he was my backfield coach.  I want you to know I finally made it into the end zone.  (Laughter and applause.)  That's the reason I’m most happy to be here.  (Laughter.)
Coach once said to me in spring practice.  I was a defensive halfback, and we had these drills.  And those of you who played or watched defensive halfbacks, we run backwards as much as we run forwards.  And we had these drills racing back and forth.  And it was all over.  And Tubby in his totally understated way gave a little -- got us all the backs together, and went, well, Biden, you run faster backwards than anybody I’ve ever seen.  (Laughter.)  A lot of my political opposition thinks that as well.  (Laughter.) 
Look, over the last four years, the Blue Hen athletic department has built on a great tradition, breaking records, playing for championships, and bringing pride to this great university.  From football to men’s and women’s basketball, you’ve done an incredible job.  You represent our alma mater well, my alma mater well.
And now, I have been around long enough to know that -- and gained enough wisdom that I’m not going to offer you any advice.  I just want to make one basic point to you today.  No graduating class gets to choose the world into which they graduate.
Every class enters the history of the nation up to that point has been written by others.  But very few classes, once every couple generations, a class enters a point in our history where they actually have a chance to change the trajectory of the country -- an inflection point where change is taking place regardless of what you do.  But because it’s in motion, you have a chance to get your hands around it, a chance to alter the trajectory, a chance -- just a chance -- to bend history a little bit.
That’s the moment into which you are graduating, and that’s the moment into which I graduated in the ‘60s.  Like many of you here today, some of the most transformative events of my life took place on this campus.  Between the time I entered the University of Delaware and graduated, the world had changed significantly:  The nuclear arms race was in full swing with the Soviet Union; the Civil Rights Movement that got me engaged in public life to being with had turned even more violent; the war in Vietnam was beginning -- by the time I graduated and got to law school, it had divided America like nothing since the Civil War; and even more damaging, it created a generational gulf that has not been seen before or since.
On November 22, 1963, on a brilliant sunny day, I stood on the steps of Hullihen Hall and learned that John F. Kennedy had just been assassinated.  In the spring in which I graduated from law school, the only two heroes I ever had in public life, Dr. King and Robert Kennedy, were murdered.  The Vietnam War was still in raging.  And my hometown of Wilmington, Delaware was in flames and the National Guard stationed on every corner.
But like you, while I was here at this great university, I had the good fortune to have professors who helped me put this chaos that surrounded us in perspective.  Dr. Dolan, Dr. Igersoll, Dr. Munroe, Dr. Bennett, Dr. Bolinski and so many others -- they not only taught me, they advised me.  They challenged me.  They helped me understand the change that was happening.  But most importantly they argued that it was within our power to fix America -— because of the incredible foundation upon which this nation was built.
They reinforced what my parents taught me that while America’s -— what Americans value most is equity, fairness and justice.  And it will -- it will -- prevail.  They also reminded me that intolerance for the abuse of power and the arrogance that flows from it is stamped into the DNA of Americans; and that the related values of personal integrity, respect for individual autonomy, family, community, and a country formed a sense of purpose for most of us.
They gave me confidence in myself and confidence in the resiliency of the United States of America.  And only several years after I walked off this campus, they once again stood with me as I announced my candidacy for the United States Senate as a 29-year-old kid determined to be part of the change; determined to end the war in Vietnam; determined to make permanent the Voting Rights Act; determined to bring nuclear escalation into nuclear reduction; and determined to demand that my sister, who did better than I did here -- (laughter) -- my sister and all the women of her generation would have every single opportunity I had.  (Applause.)
And our generation did that or started that.  And now it’s your chance -— you’re graduating into a world that is changing just as profoundly -- different dangers, but also incredible possibilities.  And you have significantly more tools.
The dangers are abundant:  fear of international terrorism and stateless actors possibly possessing weapons of mass destruction; pandemic disease; climate change; global inequity; rising powers and failing states.
But each of these challenges, each of these alternations that are taking place also present great opportunity.  The poet William Butler Yeats wrote about his Ireland in 1916, the First Rising.  It was called, Easter Sunday 1916.  And there was a line in that poem that I think better characterizes the world into which you are graduating than even it did his Ireland in 1916.  He said, “All’s changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.”  All has changed utterly since you stepped into your first class in high school through today.
Today, stateless actors not only create a threat, but an opportunity.  They're bringing together civilized nations in a common cause to wipe them out.  The effects of climate change are real and must be acted on, they're generating phenomenal breakthroughs and rapid growth in renewable energy -- electric vehicles that will travel 300 miles, filling up with electrons cheaper than gas; solar energy and natural gas -- solar energy as cheap as natural gas and coal.
The fear of pandemic disease is real, but it’s also propelled an entire generation of scientists and doctors to find the tools not only to prevent disease, but to cure diseases that once were viewed as impossible to cure.
Within the next 15 years, as Chairman Coleman can tell you, the majority of hunger in the world will be vanquished as a consequence of crops that don’t need as much soil, water or fertilizer, or any pesticides in which to thrive. 
Consider the progress we’ve made just since you’ve been here in civil rights:  the right to marry the person you love.  (Applause.)  The right of a woman to make her own health care decisions.  (Applause.)  The right of millions of people living in the shadows to earn a pathway to citizenship.  (Applause.)
We’re in the midst of incredible technological breakthroughs as frighteningly laid out by your president.  (Laughter.)  Just consider how much has changed just since you got to this point:  3D printers restoring tissue after traumatic injury, restoring skin damaged by fire to unblemished skin; hospitals testing the printing of organs for organ transplants.  We’re on the verge of regenerating organs and limbs that have been damaged and lost, saving tens of thousands of life and restoring wounded soldiers to their full capacities; speech recognition on your iPhone that has gone mainstream; software that translates in real-time conversations into multiple languages.
Let me tell you what we’re on the cusp of:  engineering white blood cells to attack cancer tumors -— allowing cancer patients to live with chronic disease without depending on difficult and painful chemotherapy, as well as radiation; sequencing the entire human genome within an hour, delivering rapid personalized medicine.
Investments in the public and private sector in innovation are astounding:  supercomputers performing 100 times faster than the fastest computer on Earth today -— transforming, revolutionizing science, medicine, and applied technology; strong, lightweight materials that are used by NASA that are now cheap enough to be used in automobiles, trucks, wind turbines.
Before you are in your mid 30s, you’ll be getting in an automobile if you live in suburbia programming it, driving to work while reading all you need to do to prepare for that day, and there will be 80 percent fewer accidents while you’re on that commute, vastly improving productivity.
Now, I could go on, but some of you will say maybe I’m a little too optimistic.  I’m always referred to as the White House Optimist, like I’m the new guy on the team.  I’ve been around unfortunately longer than all of them.  (Laughter.)
The reason I’m optimistic is I know the history of the journey of this country, and it is always, always, always forward.  Always better.  (Applause.)
And you, you are citizens of a nation that is better positioned than any country in the world to lead the 21st century, economically, politically and socially.  We’ve ended one war in Iraq, and we’re about to end the second war in Afghanistan, thank God.  (Applause.)  And our security is guaranteed by the most powerful military in the history of the world.  But we’re becoming known just not for the power -- the example of our power, but for the power of our example.  That's why today we’re the most respected nation in the world according to the Pew Foundation in every area of the world.
Our economy that you’re graduating into is two and half times bigger than the next biggest economy in the world.  Our workers are three times as productive as Chinese workers.  Our energy is cheaper and more plentiful than in Asia and Europe.  And by 2020, North America will be the epicenter of energy for the world.
We have the world’s best research universities, the best legal system.  It’s fair, open, and dependable.  We have the most agile venture capital system in the world, and we lead the world in innovation and technology.  And we have you.   You are the best educated, most engaged class that has ever graduated from this university.  (Applause.)
You are better prepared to handle the complexities of a global economy -— fully one third of you studied abroad, preparing you for an ever more interconnected world.  More than half of this graduating class -- more than half -- are women, a powerful statement -- (applause) -- a powerful statement to the rest of the world where the rights of women are denied, ignored and trampled on.  And we see it every day from Nigeria to Pakistan.
I have traveled almost 920,000 miles just since being Vice President.  I have known virtually every major leader in the world for the bulk of my career.  And the one -- the one -- thing they wonder aloud about the most, and the one thing the women in their country desire the most is why can't they be more like women in America.  And that's a fact.  (Applause.)
All of you represent what makes this country exceptional.  But there is one thing that I ask you to take on faith:  Neither optimism nor pessimism enables you to predict your future.  But I am absolutely confident that only confidence and an optimistic attitude will enable you to take a hand in shaping your future.  Because whenever the American people have been given a chance, they have never, ever, ever let their country down.  And ultimately, they’ve always answered to their better angels.
Let me close with a story.  I said I started as a young man on this campus seized with the Civil Rights Movement in the country.  I came back to Wilmington as a young lawyer, and not figuratively, literally, Wilmington was ablaze.  I went to work for a really fine law firm.  But after a few months I realized in the midst of the chaos and the city I loved occupied by the National Guard, I should do something else.  So I quit and became a public defender.  And part of my job as a public defender when there was chaos in the city was to go down to the Wilmington train station, where the National Guard bivouacked overlooking the Third Street Bridge in the east side of Wilmington to interview some of my clients who were in trouble.  And I wondered then whether things would ever, ever heal.
And it struck me that almost 40 years to the day that I stood on that platform as a young public defender, I was standing there again.  It was January 18, 2009.  I was standing with my family and thousands upon thousands of Delawareans waiting for a young black man who was leaving Philadelphia on an Amtrak train to pick me up to ride the 124 miles where we would both be sworn in as President and Vice President of the United States of America.  (Applause.)
So my hope and optimism is based on the trajectory of this country.  And you have the most incredible, incredible opportunity that you’re about to step into.  Folks, it’s never been a good bet to bet against America.  And never bet against your generation.
Class of 2014, the possibilities are unlimited, and so are America’s.  So please, don't listen to the cynics, don't let those who tell you our best days are behind us.  We’re just starting, and you’re going to change the world for us for the better.
God bless you all.  Class of ’14, go get ‘em.  (Applause.)
END
9:39 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 27, 2014
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Villanova University Commencement *As Prepared for Delivery*
Villanova University Commencement
Villanova, Pennsylvania
Father Donohue, thank you for that honor. Thank you, Dr. Hicks, for that very kind introduction.
Good afternoon, everyone! It’s wonderful to be here at Villanova to celebrate such an important day with each one of you and your families.
To my fellow teachers: congratulations on finishing another successful year.
I also want to recognize members of the military who are graduating today. Thank you for your service.
As Second Lady, as a lifelong educator, and as a proud Villanova graduate, it is truly my honor to be here with all of you.
I’m a Philly girl. I grew up in Willow Grove straight down Broad Street.
My childhood was spent crossing the Tacony-Palmyra Bridge every single weekend with my entire family. Five sisters would pile in our car – without seatbelts – and drive to South Jersey to visit my grandparents.
Along the way, we would pass pretzel vendors on the street corners, but we’d never stop. We didn’t ask because we never had any extra money.
My summers were spent watching the Phillies with my Dad on a black and white Philco TV. As a teenager, I waitressed at the shore.
I ran the Race for the Cure, the Broad Street 10-miler, and the Philadelphia Half Marathon. I watched the Mummers Parade and spent my class field trips at the Fels Planetarium and the Betsy Ross House.
I skated in the winters on the canals of Washington’s Crossing.
Growing up, I knew early what I wanted in life: a marriage like my parents’, maybe kids, definitely a career.
Although things didn’t necessarily happen in that order, I did get all three. But it wasn’t always easy.
As I matured, I became more aware of the changes that were happening all around me. I couldn’t see it clearly at the time, but a new counter culture was emerging that would seep into America’s psyche: spurred on by Vietnam and the draft; the “feminist revolution;” the increasing use of so-called recreational drugs; greater awareness that our planet’s resources were finite; student unrest on campuses like Kent State, where I personally knew one of the students who was shot but survived; racial inequality and the struggle for civil rights, and the cruel loss of our heroes, Martin Luther King, Jr. and John Kennedy.
I had to grow up, and perhaps like many of you here today, I learned that growing up takes some stepping up.
During your years at Villanova, you have seen: the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan winding down; dire predictions about climate change and the effects of global warming; revolutions for democracy spurred by social media use in countries around the globe; and the continued struggle for civil rights, especially related to women’s issues and our new definition of what makes a family.
So when I sat down to write this speech, I asked myself what is it that I can say that would matter? Because, quite frankly, I can’t remember one word from any of my graduations, nor can I remember the speakers.
My answer? What matters is what we have in common – our compassion for one another is what binds us together. Although we each carry our own hesitancies, our own fears – we each have our own capacity to dream, hope, give, and receive in return.
So I thought I’d tell you briefly three things I found that matter in life.
The first lesson is one that I try to impart to my students. It’s one that I didn’t always recognize, especially when I was facing my own setbacks.
 
And it’s this – everyone around us is struggling, and it is during those trying times when you really have to rely on your inner strength and your faith, whatever that means for you.
I’ve been in the classroom teaching for more than 30 years. One day this semester, I was telling my students I would miss our next class for personal reasons.
Of course, they have no filter or any sense of privacy and were shouting out, “Where are you going to be, Dr. B?”
So I told them: “My sister Jan is having a stem cell transplant. That’s her first treatment and she will have to stay in the same hospital room for six weeks, and I need to be with her.”
I turned to face the chalkboard because the words caught in my throat. I just needed a moment.
When I turned back to face my students, the entire class was standing, lined up to give me hugs, one by one.
They took my breath away. 
And that leads me to my second point: the power of a small act of kindness. 
My son Beau deployed to Iraq for a year in October 2008. That was a very tough year for our entire family. A military family goes through a lot during a deployment.
For my daughter-in-law Hallie and my grandchildren, Hunter and Natalie, there were so many moments – some big and many small – when Beau’s absence cast a long shadow. Like any child, Natalie had trouble understanding why her Daddy couldn’t be with her to celebrate her fifth birthday. 
The holidays were difficult for our entire family because we always spent them together. 
We tried to keep our spirits up with our regular traditions, but the empty chair at the table was a painful reminder of Beau’s absence.
What kept us going were the many people who found ways to support our family that year, through so many acts of kindness.
A neighbor shoveled after a snowstorm. Friends brought meals. Our church included Beau’s name in the prayer list.
At Natalie’s school, her teacher hung a photo of Beau’s unit on the wall of her classroom, so everyone would know that her daddy was at war. That meant so much to our entire family. 
Those small acts of kindness are a big part of why First Lady Michelle Obama and I started our Joining Forces initiative three years ago – so that all Americans would be inspired to take action on behalf of our troops and military families.
I challenge all of the graduates here today to commit to their own act of kindness as we wind down the war in Afghanistan and our troops return home.
I’m sure every single person in this room can think of a time when someone did something seemingly small that really made a difference for you.
A stranger picked up the tab for your coffee when you forgot your wallet.  A teacher said she believed in you, and pushed you a little further on a project. A friend asked how you were doing, and took the time to listen.
These are pretty simple things. But they are things that can change your day. Those acts of kindness, stacked up day after day, over a lifetime, can make all the difference.
I hope you understand its power and try to find a way to use it, every single day.
You will be surprised by how much of a difference you can make for those around you and by how much better you will feel yourself. 
The third and final lesson is to have confidence in yourself and don’t let anything stand in the way of your goals.
I see this over and over in my classroom at the community college where I teach: students who are facing significant challenges, but are determined to get their education, so they can build a better life for themselves.
I helped one woman who was writing her scholarship essay for a four-year university. Her path had not been easy – she left an abusive relationship and was homeless, living in her car with her kids.
Once she got into a homeless shelter, she was encouraged to attend a community college, where I met her as part of a women’s mentoring project.
She went on to a four-year university where she is working to earn her accounting degree – with confidence that she is on the path to a better life for herself and her family.
I have many students who have come to the United States from countries all around the world. Another semester I was teaching a course on refugees.
One student attending the community college was one of the Lost Boys of Sudan, part of the more than 20,000 boys displaced and orphaned in the Second Sudanese Civil War.
He had lost his entire family when he was only 10 years old. Everything he had known growing up was different in the United States.
Yet he was persistent, doing everything he could to finish his education. He completed his associate’s degree and is now working to help other young boys find their path in the world.
As Second Lady, I have seen this over and over – ordinary people, often facing extraordinary challenges, staying true to themselves to reach their dreams.
Teachers who stay late, who spend their own money on classroom materials, and are always dreaming up creative lessons – who are there for their students 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Because teaching is who they are.
Veterans who return home and transition out of the military who use their training to continue to serve their communities as medics, nurses, firefighters, and teachers.
Young mothers in the poorest slums in the world in Africa and India who decide to stay in their villages, so they can help educate other young girls.
Young women, like those in Nigeria and Pakistan, who risk their lives to receive an education – which we take for granted.
The Villanova motto is “Veritas, Unitas, Caritas” – Truth, Unity, Love. These are the values you have been surrounded by here – a community dedicated to pursuing knowledge as well as a commitment to serving others. 
During the time I was earning my master’s degree here, I was also teaching full-time and raising three small children.
I remember so clearly the hour-long drive each way a few nights a week – this was before the Blue Route – to get to classes. It was a lot at once.
But I loved what I found here – the intellectual rigor of the classes, the supportive values of the community.
And even though it took me 15 years to earn two master’s degrees and eventually my doctorate, I kept at it because I knew teaching was my passion.
And along the way I picked up those three lessons:  Everybody struggles.  A little act of kindness can make a huge difference.  And, it’s not easy to have the confidence to stay true to your goals.
You may have to step back, dig deep, refocus, and rely on your inner strength. But, persevere.
Let me end with one more thought that is reflected in all of these lessons: show your heart to the world.
 
Pope Francis recently paraphrased St. Ignatius by saying, quote: “…Love is expressed more clearly in actions than in words.”
So graduates, I hope you keep sharing your time, your skills that you learned here at Villanova, and your heart, with the rest of the world.
And on behalf of President Obama, the First Lady and the Vice President – we are so proud of you. We look forward to all that is to come. Congratulations and God bless you!
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 22, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden in Nicosia, Republic of Cyrus
Ledra Palace Hotel
Nicosia, Republic of Cyprus
10:23 P.M. (Local)
 
THE VICE PRESIDENT [flanked by President Anastasiades, Dr. Eroğlu, and UN special representative Buttenheim]:   Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to thank my host and -- for the incredible hospitality that's been shown to me in my private meetings with the leaders, as well as our joint meeting.  And I want to thank them for joining me tonight.  We had a very productive discussion building on the meetings I had with each leader separately earlier in the day.
 
The fact that we break bread tonight in the heart of a beautiful, ancient city -- but also in a buffer zone that separates one Cypriot community from another reminds us that things were not always as they are now.  They do not have to remain the way they are now.  A better path is open.
 
And I’m pleased that the two leaders have reaffirmed their full commitment to their joint declaration of February the 11th.  The two leaders agreed to speed up the process of negotiations toward a comprehensive settlement which is their priority.  They agreed to meet at least twice a month to this end.  Their next meeting will be on June the 2nd.
 
The two leaders also agreed to intensify work on preparing meaningful confidence-building measures as envisioned in the joint declaration.  The two leaders also agreed to revitalize the bi-communal technical committees to improve the daily lives of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.  The two leaders also agreed to jointly call upon all those who have any information on missing persons to share that information with the Committee on Missing Persons in order to assist the committee in advancing its work.  They agreed that additional resources should be provided for the work of the committee.
 
For our part, the United States will engage with all stakeholders to explore mutually beneficial initiatives to reinforce settlement negotiations.  And let me thank my colleagues again, and I look forward to seeing them again.
  [President Anastasiades, Dr. Eroğlu , and UN special representative Buttenheim depart]
  THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Let me add that I have been engaged in negotiations around the world in many difficult conflicts.  But I must tell you, I have been truly impressed by the cordiality and the ease with which both leaders speak to one another and negotiate with one another.
 
Tonight, I heard both leaders confirm a common objective -- the reunification of Cyprus as a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation.  I heard common ground on certain aspects of these negotiations.  I also heard differences.  But I do not believe they are irreconcilable differences.
 
There is clearly a lot of work to be done, but what I’m hearing gives me hope that a solution is within reach this time.  The United States encourages the leaders to discuss a package on Varosha and Famagusta.  If the two sides were to agree on this, the United States would stand ready to assist on the implementation.
 
The United States is also hoping to see quick and substantial progress on a number of core issues which would allow the sides to enter the final phase of U.N.-led negotiations.  But ultimately, the solution cannot come from the outside.  It cannot come from the United States or anywhere else; it has to come from the leaders of the two communities, and from the compelling voices of the civil society leaders I heard from earlier today.
 
People have asked me, what’s in this for the United States?  I tell you, President Obama and I believe that Cyprus is a key partner in a challenging region.  And we know it can be even a stronger partner if the next generation of Cypriots can grow up without the burden of conflict.  That would expand people’s horizons to dream of something much bigger.  It would unlock their talents and liberate them to do remarkable things.
 
Cyprus can be a growing force for peace, prosperity and stability in the eastern Mediterranean, and that would benefit the world.  That would benefit us all.  There will always be doubters, but I heard tonight from two leaders committed to proving them wrong.  The great Irish poet who recently passed away, Seamus Heaney, once wrote in a poem ironically called “The Cure at Troy” -- he had a stanza in that poem that reads as follows:  “History teaches us,” he said, “not to hope on this side of the grave.  But once in a lifetime, the longed-for tidal wave of justice rises up, and hope and history rhyme.”
 
For the sake of the boys and girls born on this island who deserve the possibility that only peace can bring, let’s finally make hope and history rhyme together.
 
May God bless Cyprus.  May God bless America and may there be a speedy resolution.  Thank you all for staying so late this evening for my statement.  Good night.
 
END
10:30 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 22, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at an Official Lunch with President Nicos Anastasiades of Cyprus
Presidential Palace
Nicosia, Cyprus
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Your Beatitude; Mr. President; distinguished leaders.  Let me begin by saying a simple thank you.  Thank you for the hospitality that's been extended to me and my wife, Jill.  And it's been so warm a welcome to this beautiful island.  I've been waiting over 40 years to come to Cyprus, and it has not disappointed -- the birthplace of Aphrodite, the Crossroads of Civilization, and I might add, a genuine strategic partner to the United States of America.
I am known in Washington as the White House optimist, as if I am the new guy on the block.  The fact I've been there longer than all the rest does not dim my optimism.  The fact of the matter is that it's a natural that my toast today will be about the future, and I believe that for both our countries, the best days are ahead for both of us. 
In America, we are emerging from a recession and two wars.  Our businesses have added 9.2 million jobs for 50 straight months.  We have ended one war and are ending another.  And we're moving forward on health care, education, energy exploration.  And as I said when I was recently in China, it's never, ever, ever been a good bet to bet against America.  We're back.  And we're with you.
Cyprus, too, has weathered tough economic times, and you’ve made some very painful reforms.  Your economy is now turning the corner.  You are emerging as a leader in the region.  And Cyprus is poised to become a key player in the Eastern Mediterranean into a new -- transforming the Eastern Mediterranean into a new global hub for natural gas and markets.  You are uniquely situated at a critical time in modern history, so it should be no surprise that the best days are ahead for Cyprus as well.
We've been working together for a long time.  We're working even more closely together now -- from more trade and investment to counterterrorism -- prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction, as the President pointed out.  And we're partners in the biggest issues of the day:  the removal of Syria’s chemical weapons, the prevention of Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and responding to Russian intervention in Ukraine.  This is not just a strategic partnership; it's a growing partnership. 
I believe -- as you do, Mr. President -- it is possible to reach a settlement that reunites Cyprus as a bizonal, bi-communal federation.  And let me state again what I've said to you in private and your colleagues -- the United States stands prepared to provide any assistance that we can toward your accomplishing that end. 
And think about it.  Think about where we can go if we can free the next generation from the conflicts of the past.  Once that is done, there is simply no limit to what Cyprus can achieve, and to what this partnership between Cyprus and the United States can achieve.
As you pointed out, I am the first Vice President since Lyndon Baines Johnson to visit Cyprus.  And I'm honored.  I've been honored to have a chance to play some small part in helping -- in helping move this relationship even a step further.  So I'd like to raise my glass in a toast -- if I can find my glass -- in a toast:  To your future; to America’s future; to the future of our partnership; and, of course, to your health.  May God bless you all.  Thank you.
(A toast is offered.)  (Applause.)
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 May 21, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to the Press at Larnaca International Airport
Larnaca International Airport
Larnaca, Republic of Cyprus
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. Minister, thank you for coming to greet Jill and me personally.  I’ve been looking forward to this visit for a long time, ever since I was elected to the United States Senate way back in 1973.
It’s great to finally be here in Cyprus, and I’m told I’m the first United States Vice President to be on Cyprus since Vice President Lyndon Johnson visited this beautiful island.  I came here at the invitation of your President, and the government of the Republic of Cyprus.  And I wanted to come to primarily underscore the value the United States attaches to our growing cooperation with the Republic of Cyprus.
This relationship is now a genuine, strategic partnership, and it holds even greater promise, Mr. Minister.  I look forward to sitting down tomorrow with the President to discuss a shared agenda, Cyprus’s growing leadership in the Eastern Mediterranean, Cyprus’s support for the mission to eliminate chemical weapons from Syria and to help prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, its role in Europe and in the regional energy security, and our continued cooperation on search and rescue, crisis response, and counterterrorism.  There’s much to discuss.
And tomorrow the President and I will also discuss events in Ukraine.  We have to be resolute and united in the face of Russian intervention.  Also I know that the Cypriot people have faced tough economic challenges and have already made painful sacrifices.  And I’ve been pleased to see the government make good on the progress of economic reform.  I believe the economy is beginning to turn the corner.  And we look forward to working with you to deepen our trade involvement and to restore growth and prosperity.
Of course, an important focus of our conversations will be the settlement process.  I look forward to meeting with the leaders of both communities; the leaders of the Greek Cypriot community tomorrow, and with the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community the following day.  The United States -- I want to be clear about this -- recognizes only one legitimate government of the Republic of Cyprus, and my visit and meetings throughout the island will not change that.  It is my personal position.  It’s the position of the United States of America, and it’s the position of the entire world -- save one country.
And it’s long past time -- 40 years -- that all Cypriots are reunited in a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation.  I’ve been encouraged by the steps that have recently been taken, the Joint Declaration on February the 11th, the visit of the Greek Cypriot negotiator to Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot negotiator to Athens, support from the international community, and the seriousness of purpose we have seen in this process thus far.
After so many rounds of talks and so many years of stalemate, it’s legitimate to ask the question whether this time can be any different.  When I think of that question I’m reminded of the words of my friend and former colleague in the United States Senate George Mitchell, the U.S. Envoy to Northern Ireland, who said, “We had 700 days of failure and one day of success,” referring to his mission in Northern Ireland. 
Peace is always possible, but it requires engagement -- not just from leaders but from citizens.  In that respect I’m encouraged to hear about the joint initiative from Cypriot political, civic and business leaders, historic religious services and dialogue, and the restoration of sacred sites throughout the island.
Now I’ve heard that the local press assumes I’m coming with a plan for peace in my back pocket to solve the Cyprus problem.  I’d like to put that rumor to rest.  I came here on behalf of the United States to help you get a solution, not to present or impose one.  Many of you know that I’ve been personally following events in Cyprus for more than 40 years, long enough to know that only Cypriots can decide on a vision for your future, and only Cypriots can exercise the courage necessary to make that vision real.
Imagine what can happen if you make sure that this time is different, that this time a solution is reached.  It would mean incredibly greater prosperity, greater security, and a future of limitless possibilities for a generation freed from the straightjacket that decades of division have imposed upon this island.  This island can and should be the bedrock of stability and opportunity for Europe and for the Eastern Mediterranean.  The story of the 20th century in Europe was one where barriers fell and peace and prosperity rose up in their place.  That can and should happen on this beautiful island.  I’ve traveled to Cyprus today because I believe this time can be different.  Whether it will depends on the people of this island.
But my wife and I look forward to seeing as much as we can of your beautiful island, Mr. Minister, and to meet as many Cypriots as we can; and again, to gain a better appreciation for their lives and their hopes. 
So let me end where I began, thanking President Anastasiades for his cooperation and for his efforts to help build a genuine strategic partnership with the United States, a partnership between our countries that holds even greater promise in the future.
Again, thank you for greeting me today, and good night -- although it’s very light.  Thank you. 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 21, 2014
Remarks by vice President Joe Biden to Romanian Civil Society Groups and Students
Cotroceni Palace
Bucharest, Romania
2:45 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. President, we may be listening to a future president.  I don't know.  (Laughter.)
I want to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  It was a pleasure having an opportunity to spend some time with you as well, and Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, and the President of the Senate, and the Justice Minister, and to all the distinguished guests here, it’s a great honor to be in this magnificent venue and at such an important time in U.S.-Romanian relations.
Laura, thank you for the introduction, but more importantly, thank you for your continuing involvement.  As I -- the first time our paths crossed was five years ago, as you said, and look at you now, pursuing an advanced degree, an advocate for international education.  And you are a reflection of the progress your country has made and continues to make.
Mr. Prime Minister, judges, prosecutors, leaders of the parliament, thank you all for coming.  In America, for all those of you who are public officials, we call this a “busman’s holiday,” having to listen to another public official make a speech.  But I’m flattered that  .
And the fact that you’re here, I think, is a reflection of the common recognition that while there may be political differences, one thing that unites all Romanian leaders is a strong stand in favor of democracy under the rule of law without question and without any caveats.
I want to thank you all, but I particularly want to thank the civil society members here today for demanding greater freedoms, fairness and social justice, and maybe most importantly dignity for all the people of Romania. 
There is a great expectation I will say to those of you who are the younger members of the audience -- there’s a great expectation not only of the people of Romania but the people in Europe and the United States that nations who join the alliance, both in NATO as well as the EU have a shared value system.  It’s the value system that is the foundation of the Western alliance.  It’s what built the alliance in the first place.
And the most fundamental of these values is not a free market; it’s an open, free, and transparent society, where corruption is viewed as the enemy, where government is honest and accountable, and people are given a fair opportunity at success and all -- regardless of their station -- are treated with dignity.
As I said when I visited five years ago as I became Vice President, the story of freedom -- your society -- is one of the great achievements in modern European history.  I admire -- and I mean this sincerely -- I admire both the moral and physical courage so many Romanians demonstrated who put everything on the line, everything including their lives, to build this new, free, democratic society.
And I’m proud that America played a small part in helping you make that journey.  And as I told Romanian troops last night, when I met them as I got off of the aircraft, American troops are honored to stand shoulder to shoulder with Tricolor warriors as NATO allies in Afghanistan and other places we’ve stood together. 
And one other important point to make I’ve made to the President and the Prime Minister today in my separate meetings:  America’s commitment to the collective defense under Article 5 of the NATO Treaty is absolutely ironclad.  It’s a sacred commitment in the eyes of the President and myself.
As President Obama said, “NATO nations never stand alone.”  NATO nations never stand alone.  We protect one another.
And one of the most remarkable changes in this relationship from years past is we no longer discuss what America can do for Romania, we discuss what we can do together for one another.  Romania has made a remarkable journey from tyranny to freedom, from captive nation to NATO ally -- and it happened, it’s happened in the space of a single generation.
For you younger members of the audience, it was your parents’ generation.  And as one of America’s Founding Fathers said, his name was Thomas Jefferson, he observed that, “The generation which commences a revolution rarely completes it.”
Well, I’m here to tell you it’s your job to complete -- to complete it.  And when you do, your children’s generation will be eternally grateful because it will solidify for the remainder of this century the democracy your parents fought so hard to establish.
For any young democracy, the most difficult but important step is burying the legacy of tyranny and establishing an economy and a government and institutions that abide by the rule of law.  Every country faces challenges to the rule of law,
including my own.  And the choices each of our countries make matter immensely -- not only for our own country, but for our neighbors. 
In the 21st century, the countries that thrive will be the ones where citizens know their voices will be heard because the institutions are transparent.  Their efforts will be rewarded because there is a fairness in the court system; where businesses can compete without having to worry about paying bribes; where judges hand down verdicts free from political influence.
The European Commission recently found that corruption costs the European Union as a whole $160 billion, or 120 billion euros every single year.  That’s 1 percent of the total GDP of the entire European Union.
Corruption is a cancer, a cancer that eats away at a citizen’s faith in democracy, diminishes the instinct for innovation and creativity; already-tight national budgets, crowding out important national investments.  It wastes the talent of entire generations.  It scares away investments and jobs.  And most importantly it denies the people their dignity.  It saps the collective strength and resolve of a nation.  Corruption is just another form of tyranny.
And corruption can represent a clear and present danger not only to a nation’s economy, but to its very national security.  There are nations, and we’ve seen it recently, that exploit corruption to exercise malign influence and undermine the very sovereignty and independence of their neighbors.
In this way, corruption has become an instrument of foreign policy for some nations.  When politicians can be bought, when courts can be manipulated, when the media becomes a tool of propaganda, there you will find a society that is susceptible to manipulation from the outside.  There you’ll find a society that loses control of its own destiny -- not only its political security, but its physical security and military readiness is also compromised. 
We’ve recently seen that in Ukraine.  We saw how over a decade and a half of corruption, literally has hollowed out their military institutions and weakened that country’s very capacity to defend itself. 
So fighting corruption is more than just good government.  It’s self-defense.  It’s a guarantor of your national sovereignty.
Many of you, inside government and out, have been working to root out corruption for years.  And I applaud you all for your efforts.  With your help, Romania has made significant achievements in fighting corruption.  Your National Anti-Corruption Agency has firmly established its independence and sent 1,000 cases to court just since last year.  Your National Integrity Agency sent forward 6,000 cases of incompatibility -— people holding office that should be mutually exclusive -— and 50 cases of elected officials with unjustified assets. 
Of course there’s work to do to see these cases through, but it’s a significant start.   It’s no wonder that your anti-corruption institutions are the most highly rated institutions in Romania in the minds of the Romanian people.  You have heroes like the Supreme Court President fighting to protect the independence of judges to speak truth to power and render justice for all.  
Romanian citizens are getting directly involved as well, many of you in this audience.  From high school students learning in your classrooms not to pay bribes to avoid traffic tickets, to young professionals holding “check-a-thons” to demand honesty from politicians and hold them accountable.  I understand some of you may be here fact-checking my speech as well.  And that's good.    For corruption is a complex and difficult problem to solve in all countries, but it can be solved.
I strongly urge you to keep taking steps forward and keep resisting the instinct to step back.  Keep demanding that your judicial institutions remain free from political influence; keep insisting that no one -- no one -- no one is above the law. 
Now, some of you may argue this focus on transparency is a foreign invention that doesn’t apply to Romania.  But you know better.  Romanians have been fighting corruption for a long time.  I was recently told a story, an old story of Cuza, the founder of modern Romania, who as legend has it disguised himself as a peasant and went to the market.  He pretended to buy milk from a merchant who was cheating customers by using two different measuring cups.  The large one he showed to the customer, and the small one he used to actually measure out the milk they were purchasing.
The ruler revealed his identity, confronted the crooked merchant, and forced him to parade through the marketplace
with his two measuring cups held high where everybody could see them —- the real one and the fake one.  And no one bought from that merchant again. 
It’s a parable, but it says a lot about how modern day economic investors think about the global marketplace.  They want to do business where they’re treated fairly, and where there is transparency, where they know the real cup from the phony cup.
Of course no leader -— in Cuza’s time or in our own -— can hope to protect these principles alone.  I have worked on this issue around the world.  And I’ve seen how it’s done well and where it’s done poorly.  And I’ve learned that it takes fearless judges, brave police, and prosecutors working 14 hours a day to investigate complex crimes —- ignoring pressure and intimidation to ensure that justice is done.
It takes leaders in the business community who recognize that fighting corruption is good for everyone because it improves the business climate and generates economic growth.  It takes politicians who understand that government exists not for our purposes but to serve the people.   And it takes a free and independent press —- under no one’s thumb -— with the protections necessary to hold all of us who are leaders accountable.  And above all, it takes an active, passionate, vigilant engagement by every citizen, like all of you in this room.
Because as surely as a man cannot live without blood pumping through his veins, democracy cannot survive without the active participation of its citizens.  That’s what we mean when we say civil society is the lifeblood of democracy.  In a literal sense it is.  We count on civil society to shine a light on injustice; to give voice to minorities and marginalized groups; to demand checks on power.
And here in “Unity Hall,” we look to all of you to champion the dignity, the protections, the fundamental human rights of all people -- of women, of Roma, of Jews, of LGBT.  For they're all God’s children.  And they deserve to be treated equally and with respect.  
There’s always going to be cynics and doubters.  But I urge you to never forget that civil society has changed countries and the world before.  And it can do it again.  And this is an urgent time for all of Central and Eastern Europe for civil societies to be awakened.  As the saying goes, democracy is not a destination.  It’s a road traveled.  So long as you travel this road, you will never be alone.  You will have the United States and many other countries as your allies, your friend, your fellow free nations standing by your side because we face a different kind of threat today than we did even a year ago.  We face a different kind of threat that preys upon nations who are not just weak, but whose governments are not solid, sustained, free of corruption.
Your government is making great progress.  The people of Romania are making great progress.  And I’ll conclude by saying what I said to both your Prime Minister and your President, I cannot imagine a Europe whole, free and secure without a strong, united and independent Romania.  So it’s not only in your interest and the interest of your countrymen to deal in a way that delivers for your constituents and for your people, the stronger you are, the more independent you, the more capable you are, the better off we all are.  As I said, it’s not what America can do for Romania, it’s what we can do together for one another.
May God bless Romania.  May God bless America, and may God protect our Romanian and American troops who are still in harm’s way in Afghanistan.  Thank you all for the honor of being able to address you.
END
3:05 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 21, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Romanian Prime Minister Victor Ponta in a Joint Press Statement
Victoria Palace
Bucharest, Romania
1:10 P.M. (Local)
PRIME MINISTER PONTA:  (As interpreted) Good day.
We are very glad and honored to have the visit of Mr. Vice President Joe Biden here in Bucharest and at the headquarters of our government.
We are very happy to see you once again after the gathering that happened in October last year in Washington.  At that time, Vice President Biden said that he will come back to Romania, and as always he kept his word, and we’d like to thank him for that. 
But I believe that his visit here is at the most necessary and right time for Romania, a moment when we have to reaffirm the idea of a strategic partnership that is stable and of long term between the United States of America and Romania, and the importance and confidence that the United States grant to the entire region and all of our partners and allies from the area, and also a special feeling towards the Romanian people that it’s not just our desire to have this strategic partnership, but also the United States considers Romania to be a trustworthy partner and a respected partner.
So this is the most important formula, and the presence of Vice President Biden in Bucharest is confirming this fundamental idea.  I want to restate once again in the name of Romania our total commitment to meet the requirements in our role that we play as a country at the border of NATO and the European Union, of the democratic world which is at this time confronted with a crisis situation that is unprecedented in the past 25 years, the aggression on behalf of the Russian Federation, breaching the international norms, the illegal annexing of Romania [sic].  These are challenges that this region has not seen in a long time.
And furthermore the presence of Vice President Biden here is a strong message for Romania, but also a strong message for the other countries in the region, first of all for Moldova, the country for which Romania has a lot of good feelings, but also for Ukraine, for Georgia and all the others that have decided to take the route of democracy, the route of reforms, and abiding the international law.
I had discussions with Vice President Biden for the decision of the Romanian government to assume all the positions that involve our situation right now.  The security can never be obtained free.  The investments that the Romanian government has to increase and has already increased regarding the defense system -- and I can tell you that we have an agreement and a political consensus in that -- for that point in the sense that for a short time period up until 2016, Romania will start allocating 2 percent of the GDP for defense expenditures.  And also the investment that Romania has made in -- from budgetary resources and EU financing and private financing in order to develop a strategic concept and specifically energy independence.
Romania is investing quite a lot.  It is open for investments so that it -- Romania itself can ensure for itself and for the Moldovan Republic an energy independence that is even more important in the current crisis conditions, an independence that will allow us to ensure to the Romanian and Moldovan population, to the economy of both countries that Russia will never be able to impede the normal functioning of these countries by using its energy supply. 
The Romanian GDP increase, and I was happy to inform Vice President Biden of the situation that right now Romania is the economy that has the most rapid growth in the European Union.  This also grants the guarantee that we can be strong, that we can meet the tasks that we all have to meet here at the border of the NATO and EU, and we have an economic development later on that is even better.
In our discussion in October when I discussed with the state Secretary for Commerce, we had discussed an action plan that the Romanian government has already concluded, and it is implementing at this time in order to increase the investments of U.S. companies in encouraging commerce, in encouraging economic development and the collaboration between the two nations.
Furthermore than the bilateral collaboration, Romania is a very determined supporter of concluding the agreement that is known as T-TIP, the trade commerce agreement between the United States and the European Union.  We believe that at this time in the common trading area where we also have economic collaboration and democratic similar ideas can make us stronger in front of any challenges.
I would like to say in my conclusion that Romania must and can be an example of success in this region, an example of security -- military security, of political collaboration with the United States, of economic development, and of the economic and the democratic functioning of its institutions.  We have reaffirmed the government’s support for an independent justice system, an impartial justice system, an efficient justice system that will be able to apply truly that important principle of the fact that no one is above the law.  And whoever breaks the law no matter what his position is must answer in front of the court.
I would like to mention at this point that we have talked quite a lot about the Moldovan state.  Every time we have the opportunity to meet, I keep telling Mr. Vice President how important Moldova is for Romania, how important it is to support the United States, the European Union for this pro-European and pro-Romanian development of the Moldovan Republic.  And I want to thank for the support that the Washington administration is providing in an explicit manner, and they have assumed the fact that Romania and the Romanian people will be the beneficiary of what many other European citizens have, which is the visa waiver system.  All of the Romanians that go into the United States are contributing to what means the United States as a whole.
And I would like to say in my closing that I assured Vice President Biden that also in this year and the following years Romania will be for the United States a reliable and respected partner.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: (In progress) hospitality, Mr. Prime Minister.  It’s good to see you again.  I appreciate your dedication to the U.S.-Romanian relationship, and I’ve enjoyed our chances to talk together both in Washington and here. 
The first thing the Prime Minister and I spoke about today was cooperation, security cooperation between the United States and Romania.  I reiterated to the Prime Minister what he already knew that -- America’s unwavering commitment to collective self-defense and Article 5.  We expect all nations to honor their NATO commitments.  We will honor ours.  And there should be no doubt about that on anyone’s mind.
We also spoke at some length about energy security and how national security and energy security come together in this part of the world in the need to ensure that Russia can no longer continue to use its energy resources and European dependence on those resources as a weapon -- a weapon against anyone in this region.
And that's why I believe that the development of a secure, diverse and interconnected energy market in Europe is the next big step for our European colleagues to initiate in a great project of European economic integration.
We are -- where our help is welcome, we are ready to provide help, and we have some little, unique expertise in this area if it is desired.
And Romania can and should be a significant part of a European energy solution.  By upgrading Romania’s infrastructure, Romania can be a lynchpin that holds together the energy markets from the Black Sea to Central and Eastern Europe.  And by expanding domestic production of natural gas, Romania can emerge as an alternative supplier for its neighbors.
And by extending the Romanian pipeline network, Romania can be part of the energy solution for Moldova, a country that is now overwhelmingly almost 100 percent reliant on Russian energy. 
Our countries stand together in supporting Moldova’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, its democratic development and its European aspirations.
The Prime Minister and I also spoke about steps we are taking to grow and deepen the economic partnership, including the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership that we’re in the process of negotiating.  Not only will it strengthen the vibrant economies of Europe and the United States and strengthen them all, but it also will set down new rules of the road that are necessary for the conduct to trade and commerce in the 21st century. 
And as I discussed with the President and the Prime Minister, there is no more important step Romania can take than to attract jobs and investment that can continue to help it grow but continue in the process to strengthen the rule of law in order to allow that to continue.
When other countries exploit corruption to undermine their neighbor’s sovereignty and independence, this is not only a matter of economic opportunity, but national security.  But it’s also a matter of economic competitiveness.  Where the rule of law is strong, where courts adjudicate disputes and in a transparently fair way, where the rules of the marketplace are predictable, this is where companies around the world invest.  This is where they make their homes.
I was encouraged by the Prime Minister’s agreement last October to take concrete steps to improve Romania’s business climate.  Of course, the follow-through is essential.  But it’s underway.  I applaud you, Mr. Prime Minister, for taking this initiative on such an important issue.
Romania to state the obvious is already a terrific ally, partner and friend.  And our future together is bright.  It’s no longer a matter of what it was a decade or more ago about what the United States can do for Romania.  It’s about what we can do together to strengthen each of our countries.
So, Mr. President [sic], thank you for your commitment to continue to strengthen this relationship, for your work to make our futures even brighter and may God bless the Romanian people.  May God bless America and may God protect our troops -- Romanian and American -- who are still deployed in Afghanistan.
Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.
END
1:23 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
 May 21, 2014
Remarks by vice President Joe Biden and Romanian President Traian Basescu in a Joint Press Statement
Cotroceni Palace
Bucharest, Romania
11:10 A.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT BASESCU: (As interpreted) Good afternoon.  Welcome to Cotroceni Palace.
Today we had a meeting, which is extremely important, with Mr. Vice President Joe Biden, a meeting in which we have discussed the main topics on our bilateral agenda and also on the regional agenda. 
I can say that after Romania joined NATO and the Europe Union, the strategic partnership for the 21st century that we have pinned down with the U.S. is the third major political achievement after the December revolution.  We welcome the firm commitment of the U.S. for the fifth article of the NATO Treaty.
We have also discussed about the need to consolidate the rule of law in Romania, the rule of law as a premise for progress further in achieving at the maximum level the strategic partnership we have with the U.S.
In our talks, I thanked Vice President Biden for the immediate reaction, the immediate response that the U.S. had when the conflict started in Ukraine and Crimea was illegally annexed.  The U.S. reacted by supplementing air forces, naval forces and land forces that are ready to participate in any kind of mission, particularly in a mission of discouraging Russia’s attitude, Russia’s desire to become again the USSR.  It is a reconfirmation and this time a proof to the fact that the United States of America are true to their word.
That's why the U.S. are so demanding in their relationship with Romania that we also should be true to our word and make the rule of law in Romania.
We have also discussed of the vulnerabilities created at the Black Sea, and also we have tackled the issue of the future summit of NATO.  A great weakness, vulnerability of the region, we analyzed it, and it means the energy dependence, the very high energy dependence on the Russian gas.
Last but not least, we have also reviewed the very strong rise in American investments in Romania, which created tens of thousands of jobs.  And I give an example to Mr. Vice President.  I have recently visited a large company, an American company, which is Lufkin, which opened a shop in Romania.  And the first pumps, oil pumps produced for the oil industry were actually meant for export to the U.S. 
Thank you so much.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you very much, Mr. President.  It’s a great pleasure to be back in Romania, particularly on such a beautiful day.  I’ve always enjoyed my visits here.
I want to thank you, Mr. President, for your candid and insightful advice, not just on this trip, but over the years, and for your commitment, as strong as it is to the transatlantic partnership. 
Every time I come to Romania, I’m impressed again at just how much progress you’ve made.  In a single generation your country has risen from tyranny to join the ranks of the world’s free nations, the European Union, and the most powerful alliance in human history, the NATO alliance.
2014 marks the 10-year anniversary since your admission to NATO.  As you’ll remember, in 1999, I tried to get you included in NATO.  If I had my way it would have been the 15th anniversary we’d be having.  But I tried to bring it about even sooner.  As a matter of fact, back in those days, Mr. President, then-President Clinton always used to kid me -- was the deal -- was I pushing so hard because I wanted NATO headquarters moved to my home constituency in Delaware.  (Laughter.) 
But I can say I had high hopes for Romania then as an ally, and every one of my hopes and expectations have been met.  And, Mr. President, thank you for proving me right about Romania’s entry into NATO.
Romanians have stood shoulder to shoulder with us in the Balkans, in Iraq and Afghanistan.  About 1,000 Tricolor troops continue to serve there -- all courage and no caveats on the battlefield; all courage, no caveats.  All in. 
And you’ve offered us a transit hub to help draw down our force in Afghanistan, and you’ve also embraced the post-2014 mission in Afghanistan; and just as you immediately embraced our phased adaptive approach to ballistic missile defenses five years ago when I came to visit with you.
And I want to reaffirm that we’re on track to open the missile defense site at Deveselu next year that will be opened.  And we encourage Romania and the leadership you begin in its efforts to bring its defense budget up to the 2 percent of GDP that NATO members have committed to.  Your supplemental funding, Mr. President, this year is a good step forward in Romania keeping that commitment to NATO.
And as we’ve talked often, Mr. President, both here in person and on the telephone, we in the United States -- the President and I -- we value our alliance with you.  It’s no longer just what we can do for Romania, it’s what we can do together.  And we’re doing a good deal together.
One of the main reasons why I came today is to stand on Romanian soil and say what cannot be said often enough.  We will honor -- we will honor Article 5 of the NATO Treaty.  It is a sacred obligation.  There should be no doubt about it.  It should not be in question.  No NATO ally stands alone.  We protect one another.  Period.  We protect one another.  Period.  End of discussion.
And, Mr. President, the aggression in Crimea, less than 250 miles from Romanian territory, reminds us of why we need NATO and why Romania belongs to NATO.
Today the President and I discussed the security of this region and the situation in Ukraine, as we have by telephone recently as well.  And we commend the Ukrainian government for the steps they have taken to ingrain -- engage Ukrainians from all parts of that country, including the east and the south on the issues of constitutional reform.  Sunday is election day in Ukraine, as it is here.  And it’s a chance for Ukrainians to decide their own future.
All countries in Europe, all countries should use their influence to promote a stable and positive environment so the Ukrainian citizens can cast their ballots freely. 
The President and I have agreed that if Russia undermines these elections on Sunday, we must remain resolute in imposing greater cost on Russia.  And we must be equally resolute in reinvesting in the NATO alliance. 
In that spirit, we spoke about the ongoing, urgent U.S. and NATO efforts to step up our military presence in Central and Eastern Europe in the air, on the ground, and at sea.  Romania is contributing to these efforts.
Last night, I visited when I landed the joint military exercises, Carpathian Spring, where Romanian and American troops are sharpening their skills and demonstrating our collective resolve.  We support the Supreme Allied Commander of Europe’s intention to finalize contingency plans for our Black Sea allies and do that at the Wales summit.  And we have assigned extra strategic planners to help NATO meet this goal when we assemble in Wales.
Of course, what’s at stake for Romania is more than its physical security.  It’s a chance for your people, Mr. President, to live lives defined by freedom, prosperity and dignity.  All three of those -- freedom, prosperity and dignity -- depend on equal treatment of citizens under the predictable rule of law.
In my travels over the years, and recently from Latin America to the Middle East to this very region of Europe, I’ve seen countries depose tyrants only to struggle to reclaim their future from the oligarchs and vested interests who remain after the tyrants have been deposed.  I’ve seen how countries that protect the rule of law and build strong institutions thrive, and those who do not do not.
As we saw in the Maidan, those who don't do these things tend to face instability.  They underperform in the global economy where jobs and investment can always go somewhere else.
This is also a matter of sovereignty and independence, and even national security, all of which are undermined when others use corruption to exercise influence in your society.  Corruption saps the collective strength and resolve of a nation.  It is merely another form of tyranny.  And fighting corruption is more than just about good government.  It’s patriotism plain and simple.
And, Mr. President, as I’ve told you on many occasions, that's why I and the President and the American people so appreciate your personal efforts to reinforce and protect the rule of law here in Romania and why it’s so important.  It’s important for your economy.  It’s important for your democracy.  And it’s important for your freedom.  And above all, it’s important for the lives of citizens who deserve to know their voices will be heard in government, that their businesses can compete fairly without bribes, that their disputes will be adjudicated transparently by a court system that is trusted, and that no Romanian -- any more than any American -- is above the law.
On so many fronts, Mr. President, there’s still important work ahead -- on trade, investment, energy security, all of which we discussed today and we’ll continue to discuss.  Mr. President, the state of our alliance is already strong in no small part because of your efforts over the years.
And I’m honored -- I’m honored to be able to make this visit and to make them even stronger.  The future should be ours -- freedom.  And, ladies and gentlemen, I want to personally tell the President I know his term will be up before mine.  I will miss him.  I will miss him.  And God bless Romania.  God bless America and may God protect our troops.
Thank you very much.
END
11:25 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 20, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to Joint United States and Romanian Participants in Carpathian Spring Military Exercise
Otopeni Military Airbase
Bucharest, Romania
3:31 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Let me begin by saying, Mr. Minister, thank you, and it’s very hot in here.  I was supposed to -- I was told it was going to be cooler here, but thank you for the great weather.
Ladies and gentlemen, it’s an honor to have a chance to see our militaries work together in this Carpathian Spring Joint Military Exercise.  The last time I saw you working together was in Afghanistan.  And it is -- it’s a great benefit to both of us that we are side by side.  It’s my pleasure to take a moment to recognize all that you do to keep the people safe and strong in our alliance. 
Over the past 25 years I’ve come to know and appreciate this beautiful country.  I’ve been here many, many times.  I’ve met I think with just about every one of your leaders.  I’ve watched you make the journey from tyranny to freedom.  I even advocated for Romania’s early entry into NATO when I was a United States senator. 
Even so I’m not sure I understood the full extent of the moral and physical courage of the Romanian people when we began this effort until I heard about you from American troops on the front lines.  They told me that Romanian soldiers were warriors.  They were capable, and they were brave.  I think our fellow men and women here in American uniforms would agree that we are very proud -- very proud -- to serve with Romanian forces. 
So above all I’m here to say thank you to the Romanian men and women who serve to keep us safe, to the families who wait for them at home.  My wife, Jill, and I understand what it’s like to wait.  Our son spent a year in Iraq.  And so your families, we owe you as well. 
And I especially want to pay tribute to the 26 Romanians who gave their lives in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the 143 who were wounded.  We owe them and their loved ones a debt of gratitude that we will never be able to repay.
In Romania, American forces have found a devoted NATO ally.  I never doubted that for a moment as the effort to admit Romania into NATO was underway, serious and steadfast partner that you’ve been from day one.  About a thousand Romanians remain in Afghanistan -- four serving without caveats, fully in the fight, alongside our women and men.  And I’m pleased that you will continue to support the post-2014 mission in Afghanistan.
Romania today is hosting U.S. Marines at the M-K Airbase, which also supports logistical operations for Afghanistan.  You’re building a fleet of F-16s.  Romania is working to bring its defense budget up to 2 percent of GDP, as all NATO allies should and must.
To the Americans here today, let me say that I believe you are the greatest generation of warriors the world has ever produced.  And that is not hyperbole.  You represent a generation of Americans equal to any that has ever gone before you.  I’ve seen you in Bosnia and Kosovo, Baghdad and Basra, Fallujah and Ramadi, Kabul and Kandahar.  I’ve even seen you in those FOBs up in the Kunar Valley.  You’re an incredible group of warriors. 
You and your family are part of an unbroken chain of patriots who’ve stood guard since World War II over freedom’s frontier, right here in Europe.  I could not be more proud of all of you.
We too care deeply about the alliance, Mr. Minister.  America’s commitment to collective defense under Article 5 of NATO is a sacred obligation in our view -- a sacred obligation not just for now, but for all time.  So I’m here to say on behalf of the President what I hope you already know:  You can count on us.  Period.  We do what we say, and we mean what we say.
Today aggression in Crimea, less than 250 miles from Romanian territory, from NATO’s borders reminds us why we need NATO and why Romania belongs to NATO.  What Russia has done violates not just Ukraine’s sovereignty, but a fundamental principle we fought for in the 20th century and thought we had clearly established.  Europe’s borders should never again be changed at the point of a gun, which is why we continue to condemn -- condemn -- Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea. 
So long as Russia’s efforts to destabilize Ukraine continues we must remain resolute in imposing greater costs on Russia, imposing those costs together.  But our strategy is about more than just imposing cost.  It’s fundamentally about investing in a revitalized NATO that emerges from this crisis and works toward a successful summit in Wales, stronger and more united.  America and our NATO allies have urgently stepped up our military presence in the air, land and on the sea of NATO’s eastern flank.  In just the past weeks we’ve had ships visit.  The USS Truxton, Cook, Taylor, as well as the Dacian Viper F-16 exercise.  And in the coming days, new ships -- the Vella Gulf will enter the Black Sea to conduct port visits and maritime training.  Period. 
Since mid March the U.S. has been flying refueling missions over Poland and Romania in support of NATO’s AWACs.  And we are on track to open up a missile defense site at Deveselu, next year.  We support the Supreme Allied Commander of Europe’s intention to finalize contingency plans for the Black Sea allies by the Wales summit.  And we have -- we have assigned extra strategic planners to help NATO meet that goal.  As President Obama said, “NATO nations never stand alone.”  NATO nations never stand alone. 
I want to thank our Romanian colleagues for standing with us, alongside us, emboldening us, making us stronger.  And I thank each and every one of the American troops for their continued patriotic service.  Each and every one of you is doing your countries a great service.
May God bless Romania, may God bless America, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you for your service.  (Applause.)
END
3:39
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 12, 2014
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Annual Mother's Day Tea
State Dining Room
11:19 A.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Good morning, everyone.  And thank you all for being here.  It’s wonderful to welcome you to the White House.
Many of you know that I’m a proud military mom and grandmom.  And I’m always honored to be in the presence of military families.  My son Beau is a soldier in the Delaware Army National Guard, and he deployed for a year to Iraq.  So while I’m always honored to be in the presence of our military families, I feel a special bond with other military moms. 
I’ll never forget the day that Beau deployed; that feeling of pride and concern that military moms know all too well.  Having Beau overseas was tough.  It was a tough year for our entire family, especially my daughter in law, Hallie, and their two children, Natalie, and my grandson Hunter.  But there were a lot of people who stepped up in different ways to support our family that year.  A neighbor came over and shoveled the driveway in a snowstorm.  The church included Beau’s name in the bulletin.  And at Natalie’s school, her teacher hung a photo outside the door so when the children walked into Natalie’s classroom they always knew that her daddy was at war.
Through the whole experience, those acts of kindness meant so much to them and to us.  While our sons and daughters serve so selflessly, having a community share the burden makes all the difference in the world.
And so for Mother’s Day, we wanted to simply say thank you to all the mother who have loved and supported us.  Thank you for all that you do for your selflessness and for your sacrifice on behalf of our country.
And now, it is my great honor to introduce our country’s great supporter of military moms and families, my friend and partner, First Lady -- and Mom -- of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  Yay to Mother’s Day, to us moms.  (Applause.)  Hello, everyone.  Welcome to the White House.  And for some of you, welcome back to the White House.  (Laughter.)  I spoke to a couple of the kids; they were like, oh, I’ve been here before.  (Laughter.)  Been here, done that.  So it’s good to have you guys back.
Thank you, Jill.  Thank you for your friendship, your partnership, that great introduction.  It’s been just wonderful working with you on Joining Forces.  I also want to recognize all the Cabinet and senior military spouses we have here today. 
And of course, I want to recognize my mom, Marian Robinson, who is here.  (Applause.)  Now, moms, grandmas, the one thing you have to understand about this woman -- first of all, she never comes to anything.  (Laughter.)  She’s like, no, I don’t want to, I’m not going.  But she comes to this event every year, and that is a special statement from her.  But it gives me an opportunity once a year to embarrass her by publicly stating how much my mom has meant to me in this realm of service that we’re doing here at the White House. 
There is no way I would be standing up straight on my feet if it weren’t for my mom, who is always there to look after our girls, to love them and to be mad at me when I’m disciplining them -- (laughter) -- which I still don’t get.  Same rules that we had.  When they work in my house, she’s like, why are you so mean?  (Laughter.)  But that’s what grandmas are for.  That’s what she reminds me -- oh, yeah.  (Laughter.) 
But especially, she’s been that shoulder for me to lean on. I can always go up to her room and cry, complain, argue, and she just says, go on back down there and do what you’re supposed to do.  (Laughter.)  So if my mom reflects the love and support that the moms here have given to their families, then we’re in good space here.  So, Mom, I love you.  And thank you.  I’m going to stop now, because I’ve got to get through the rest of this. 
But as I look around the room, I see all the women who are pouring so much love and support -- that same kind of love into their families.  We have an extraordinary group here today.  We’ve got moms who have served in Iraq and Afghanistan.  We’ve got military wives and partners who have moved across the country again and again.  We have grandmothers who have helped to care for their grandkids while mom or dad or both are deployed.  So we have some really phenomenal representation of what mothering can mean in the lives of so many families, in particular our military families.
Just to embarrass a couple of people, we’ve got Judith Chedville here.  Where’s Judith?  There Judith is, in the back.  Oh, I met that little precious one in the back.  (Laughter.)  Well, Judith served our country in Iraq and Kuwait, and left the service in 2004 because, she said, she could no longer serve in good conscience under “don’t ask, don’t tell.”  When my husband repealed the policy in 2011, Judith -- yes -- (applause) -- reenlisted.  And today, she is a first lieutenant in the Texas Army National Guard.  She is here this morning with her spouse, Alicia Butler, and their beautiful one-year-old daughter, Jordan.  You saw her.  So we are proud of you both, proud of you all.  And thank you for being here. 
We also have Karen Ruedisueli -- where is Karen?  There you are.  We’re going to embarrass you, too.  (Laughter.)  Now, Karen’s husband Kurt is an army major who served for years in Iraq and Afghanistan.  And Karen is here with her eight-year-old daughter Kate, and her seven-year-old son John.  (Laughter.)  They’re not shy.  (Laughter.)  But the thing that always strikes me about military kids is how much they sacrifice. 
See, in their short lifetime, Kate and John have lived in 10 different houses.  They have gone to three different elementary schools.  And with all those moves, Karen was forced to put her 15-year career in marketing and development on hold.  But she has been so determined to use her skills and her talents to give back, so over the past few years she’s been a volunteer for Blue Star families.  She has led the Family Readiness Group when her husband’s unit deployed to Afghanistan.  And today, she is working full-time with the National Military Family Association to advocate for other families like hers.  So she has found a way to keep it going.  (Applause.)
We’ve got women like Karen all in this room -- all of you.  I could go on and tell story after story.  But you all are perfect examples of why this event is so special and why we want to bring you all here today, because as military moms you’re doing so much not just for your families, but you’re doing so much for your communities and for our country.  And most people don’t know it.  They don’t know what you do.  You’re the ones, even with husbands deployed and things going on, you’re still driving the carpool, volunteering, leading the neighborhood organizations and working with your congregations to do care packages for other people.  You’re the ones who answer the phone call late at night when a neighbor needs your help.  And no matter what your country asks of you and your family, you’re the ones who step up and serve.  And you do it with grace, with dignity, and without complaint.
So today, we just wanted to give you a little something back for the years of service and sacrifice that you make.  As a token of our gratitude, we’d like to bring you here today.  And all of your kids have been busy in the State Dining Room making wonderful surprises for you, and they were all very diligent.  And I don’t think anyone got dirty that I saw.  (Laughter.)  We made sure they were dirt-free activities.  (Laughter.)  We have a hand up.  Do you have something you want to state, sweetie?  Yes.
CHILD:  I didn’t get to do any crafts with you.  Could I do them --
MRS. OBAMA:  You know what?  There are -- sweetie, there are still crafts to do.  And when we get through, we’re going to make sure you get to do all the crafts, okay?  (Laughter.)  All right? (Applause.)  I’m going to assign -- who do we have -- Rory, I’m going to put you in charge of this.  I saw you first.  (Laughter.)  What’s your name, sweetie?
CHILD:  (Inaudible.)
MRS. OBAMA:  What? 
CHILD:  (Inaudible.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Denny?
MOTHER:  Nettie.  
MRS. OBAMA:  Nettie.  All right, Rory and Nettie, you guys are going to hook up after this and you’re going to do every single craft that we have.  (Laughter.)  Did anyone else miss out on crafts?  Did you?  Did you get to do your craft?  You have been trying to shush him for the entire time.  (Laughter.)  Did you get a chance to do a craft or you just want to talk?  (Laughter.)
See, this is how much your kids love you.  (Laughter.)  They don’t want to miss out on the crafts, and we will make sure that -- but, first, before we do that, Nettie, we’ve got a special guest. 
We have someone here today who is a new mother herself.  She came all the way here from New York, even though she just had a three-month old, and she’s here for the same reason we’re all here -- because she is proud of you, she is grateful for your service and sacrifice.  She knows just a little bit about what it means to be a busy mom juggling a lot of things.  She’s an extraordinarily talented singer, songwriter, a nine-time Grammy winner.  And listening to her music is the perfect way to kick back, relax, and enjoy yourselves for a little while. 
So we are so grateful that she is here.  She is here with her mom and her family as well.  Please join me in welcoming the one and only Norah Jones.  (Applause.)
(Norah Jones performs.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, I hope you all have had a good time here at the White House.  You had some treats; you hung out for a little bit.  But Jill and I are going to meet you in the Blue Room so that we can say hello to everyone.  Enjoy the rest of your day.  Make sure to take time out for yourselves.  That’s the one thing I’ve learned from my mom, is to treat yourself well.  Do that every single day. 
We love you.  We respect you.  We admire you.  And we will see you again, so be good.  (Laughter.)  And to all the kids here, eat your vegetables!  (Laughter.) 
Oh, we have another hand.  Yes?
CHILD:  What about chicken?
MRS. OBAMA:  Chicken?  Chicken is good.  (Laughter.)  Okay, eat your vegetables and some chicken.  (Laughter.)  All right, you guys, thanks so much for coming.  We will see you in there soon.  (Applause.)
END
11:36 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 30, 2014
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Joining Forces Impact Pledge Announcement
Red Cross National Headquarters
Washington, D.C.
11:33 A.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  (Applause.)  Thank you, Chrissandra.  Wow, you are quite impressive, isn’t she?  (Applause.)  Thank you for your service, and keep up the good work in school.  And I love the fact that you love your teachers.  (Laughter.)
Chrissandra’s story is a lot like the stories I’ve heard from other military children and families I’ve met when I visited bases all around the world -- moving from school to school, making new friends, joining new sports teams, and, despite it all -– just like Chrissandra -- continuing to excel in school.  And I’m always impressed by their resilience and their strength. 
But no matter how resilient our military families are, they face challenges that most Americans do not have to shoulder: sending their loved ones into harm’s way, uprooting their lives and starting over again and again and again.  And that is why what all of you in this room are doing is so important.  You are stepping up and working together to support our service members and their families. 
When the First Lady and I started Joining Forces three years ago, we knew Americans would answer our call, but we had no idea how much they would step up.  In our workplaces, our schools, and in our communities, what we have seen is inspiring.  All of you in this room are a testament to that.  Every one of you –- the nonprofits, the philanthropies and the foundations here today -– are doing critical work to support our troops and their families.
One example is the National Math and Science Initiative, or NMSI, which Chrissandra just talked about.  There are military children in every school district in the country.  They need a safe and nurturing school environment.  They deserve access to the highest-quality teaching and education.  As a teacher and Blue Star mom, this is particularly close to my heart.
NMSI is improving the caliber of science, technology, engineering, and math courses at our military-serving schools.  As a result of partnering with business and foundations, NMSI has been so successful that since its inception in 2010, it has expanded from just four schools in two states to 71 military-impacted high schools in 18 states today.  And that’s just incredible.  (Applause.)  It means that thousands of military children are getting access to AP courses, challenging themselves and preparing them for college and careers.  That is the power of a nurturing school and a caring teacher.
The First Lady and I have met many teachers and administrators who are making things easier and better for military children in their classrooms -- teachers who arrange parent-teacher conferences by Skype so deployed parents can participate, school administrators who make sure parents have access to a copy of a student’s records when they transfer, or teachers like the one in my granddaughter Natalie’s classroom who hung up a photo of my son’s deployment unit so the whole class would know that Natalie’s daddy was at war.  That photo on that wall meant the world to Natalie, and it meant the world, really, to all of our family.
These teachers and all the other individuals and groups across this country who are supporting our troops and their family are showing all Americans that there are countless ways to help, some large and many small, but all important -- and I can tell you from personal experience, all appreciated. 
So thank you all for everything that you do.  We have made incredible progress over the last three years through Joining Forces, but we know that there’s so much more that we can do.
And I can think of no one better to lead the way than my friend and our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, hello, everyone. 
AUDIENCE:  Hello.
MRS. OBAMA:  You guys look good.  (Laughter.)  I like that you’re here. 
I want to start, of course, by thanking Jill, not just for that kind introduction but for her incredible leadership and partnership with me on Joining Forces.  It has just been a delight, and we have had a phenomenal month and a phenomenal three years.  So thanks, Jill.  Thanks for being right there with me every step of the way.
And of course, I have to acknowledge this phenomenal young woman, Chrissandra.  I want to thank her for sharing her story.  Chrissandra, she represents so many kids out there.  And Jill and I have had the opportunity to meet with hundreds of them, and we are just blown away by their poise, their grace, their stamina, their persistence.  Her family is the face of service to our country.  And if anybody ever wonders why we do this, it’s because of families like theirs.
Now, before we get started, I want to take a moment to recognize someone who has been vital to the success of Joining Forces this year.  I’m going to embarrass him, but Colonel Rich Morales –- where is Rich?  (Applause.)  There he is.  (Applause.)  Well, that response says it all, but I still have a few things to say.  (Laughter.) 
Today is Rich’s last day as our executive director for Joining Forces.  And as you all know, over the years, we have been blessed to have some of our incredibly talented and dedicated servicemembers to lead this effort, and Rich has been no exception. 
Let me tell you a little bit about him, if you don’t know.  He’s a proud West Point grad.  He has served our country in Iraq and the Balkans.  And he has provided such wonderful spirit and leadership for this initiative this year.  He is a true joy.  And let me just say this:  He’s still the only one on my staff who stands up when I walk in the room, and I’m going to miss that.  (Laughter.)
But we know that far beyond his role with us, or with our military, his most important job is being a husband to his high school sweetheart, Christy, and a father to their adorable four-year-old son, Matthew.  Now, when Rich leaves here, he’s off to do more great stuff.  He’s going to finish his PhD -- as if he hasn’t done enough -- and then he will serve as an Army brigade commander at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio.
So, Rich, I’m going to miss you.  You have been amazing this year.  You’ve gotten so much done.  And your spirit and your smile and your passion has just been a pleasure to work with.  So let’s give Rich one last big round of applause.  (Applause.)  I hope you’re duly embarrassed.  (Laughter.)   
 
And with that, I’d like to thank everyone at the Council on Foundations and all of the members of the White Oak steering committee for their leadership in organizing this event.  I also want to thank everyone at the Red Cross not only for hosting us today, but for the incredible work you do every day.  Red Cross has a special place in my heart because I served on the board in Chicago.  We have seen the vital role you play for our country over these past few days as you all are working around the clock to help communities in Arkansas and all across the South and the Midwest recovering from a string of devastating tornados.  So we are especially grateful, as we always are, for your extraordinary efforts, especially in times like these.
And finally, I want to thank all of you here today -- the philanthropic and nonprofit leaders who are stepping up to support our troops, our veterans, and their families. 
A couple of weeks ago, I was once again reminded about how important all of this work is that we do on behalf of our amazing men and women because I was watching something on TV when one of those surprise videos of a soldier returning home from a long deployment came on the screen.  We’ve all seen those moving moments:  The father bear-hugging his family at mid-court at a game, the little boy with tears in his eyes sprinting into his mother’s arms in the front of his classroom. 
And I don’t know about you, but I could watch those videos all day, and I know that’s true for many of you.  These scenes tug at our heartstrings and often move us to tears like no other.  Moments like these always make us feel good, and they remind us of the sacrifice our military families are making for our country every single day.
But for me, having spent so much time getting to know these wonderful military families, these heart-felt moments raise so many questions and so many concerns.  What happens after the cameras are turned off?  After the rest of us have gone on with our lives, what’s next for these families?  Will that father find a job once he leaves the service?  And if he does, will it be a good one, one that allows him to support his family?  Will he have the support he needs to deal with any mental or physical challenges that he may face?
And what about the families?  Will his spouse be able to pursue her own career when the family is transferred across the country again?  How will the kids adjust to yet another set of changes –- new home, new school, new friends, figuring out how to keep up with coursework?
You see, for most of us as Americans, that surprise homecoming, that feel-good moment, that’s the happy ending to the story.  But for these families, it’s really just the beginning.  In so many ways, their journey is just getting started.  And that’s why, when they come home, it is up to the rest of us to be there for them.  After everything they’ve done for us, these families should never have to bear these burdens alone. 
And that’s why, three years ago, Jill and I started Joining Forces.  We wanted to rally all Americans to honor and support our troops, our veterans and their families.  And as I mentioned, all month long, we have been celebrating our third anniversary with a series of events to highlight the overwhelming outpouring of support we have seen from across the country.
American businesses have hired and trained more than half a million veterans and military spouses.  Teachers and administrators are reaching out to military children in their classrooms.  Legislators have come together in almost every state to propose or pass legislation to help our vets and military spouses get the professional licenses and credentials they need –- and transfer them across state lines.  Associations of medical schools and social workers and nurses are training their providers to better diagnose and treat issues like post-traumatic stress and traumatic brain injuries.  And, of course, Americans from across the country have stepped up to volunteer more than 22 million hours right in their own communities to honor our military families. 
So we have come a long way in three years.  But this anniversary isn’t just a celebration -- it’s also a call to action.  Because right now, we are in a pivotal moment for our military families and for our country.  By the end of this year, after 13 long years, our war in Afghanistan will finally be over.  More and more -– yes, that’s worth some applause.  (Applause.)  And more and more of our newest veterans, the 9/11 generation, will be hanging up their uniforms and transitioning to civilian life. 
So in the years ahead, there will be fewer news stories and homecoming videos, fewer community parades for our military and their families.  And without these celebrations and reminders, it’s going to be easy for us to forget the burden they’ve shouldered after more than a decade of war.  It’s going to be easy to forget how, long after they come home, these families will continue to deal with employment and financial difficulties, or post-traumatic stress, or for some, the emotional cost of losing a loved one. 
So we cannot allow ourselves to forget their service to this country.  So that means we’ve got to get moving right now.  We’ve got to show our veterans and military families that our country is there for them not just while they’re in uniform, but for the long haul.
And that’s what today is all about.  Because whenever our country has needed to tackle an issue like this, we’ve looked not only to businesses and governments for solutions, but we look to our generous philanthropic organizations as well.  Throughout our history, we’ve seen donors and foundations step up again and again to help us overcome the challenges we’ve faced as a country.  Whether it’s building schools in the segregated south, funding AIDS research, or addressing poverty and homelessness, our philanthropic institutions have always played a huge role in creating positive change.
That’s why I am thrilled to announce that the Council on Foundations is continuing that tradition by extending that same kind of energy and support to our troops, veterans and their families long after our wars are over.  They’re bringing together benefactors from across the country to create a stronger national funding structure for groups that support our military families. 
It’s called the Veterans Philanthropy Exchange, and it’s going to allow these groups to do a number of things -- share best practices, create new resources, recruit even more donors to support our military families in the years ahead.  Many of these groups have been supporting these causes for years, and they had already committed $62 million to military families by 2019.  But they know that that is not enough if we’re truly going to meet the needs of these families.  We’re going to have to do more. 
And so, today, they’re announcing that they’re pledging $102 million in new funding toward our military families over the next five years.  So this is a huge deal.  That’s worthy of a round of applause.  (Applause.)  
And I want to take a moment to thank not only the Council on Foundations, but the four main organizers of this effort:  The McCormick Foundation, The Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation, The Blue Shield of California Foundation, and The Lincoln Community Foundation.  So again, let’s give them all another round of applause.  Yes!  (Applause.)  Well done. 
But we also know there’s more work to do.  So in the coming months and years, we need even more donors to join this effort so that we can fully support all those wonderful nonprofits and community groups that do such wonderful work for our military families every day.  And we have seen the effect that this kind of financial support can have on organizations working on the ground to help our servicemembers, veterans and their families. 
Philanthropic leaders like so many of you here in this room have helped to fund efforts like the National Military Family’s Association -- they give college scholarships to military spouses.  And we’ve seen it in the peer mentors and support groups that are supported from the Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors.  And there’s a wonderful handbook for caregivers for our wounded warriors that is developed from Blue Star Families.
And behind each of these efforts –- and there are many, many more -- are thousands of stories -- stories of caregivers who felt less isolated after they spoke with a peer, stories of survivors who are no longer alone in their grief, spouses and children who have better opportunities for their future.  Those are the stories behind Joining Forces. 
This effort is so much bigger than me or Jill or even events like this one.  It’s about the military families who live in communities all across this country.  And it’s about the veterans who have given so much to all of us –- veterans like Jennifer Crane.
Jenn enlisted in the military when she was just 17.  Her first day of basic training was September 11, 2001, and that day, a drill sergeant told her class that they would be going to war.  A little more than a year later, she was in Afghanistan.  And just three weeks into her deployment, one of her best friends was killed, and Jenn was assigned to funeral detail.  A month later, her base was attacked, and she saw the horrors of war –- images that stayed with her long after she returned home in 2003. 
And when she got back, she says she began to feel “totally isolated from society” –- perfectly normal feeling.  She was experiencing all of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress -- nightmares, mood swings, depression –- but she just didn’t know it yet.  Unable to cope, Jenn began self-medicating.  She turned to drugs and couldn’t hold down a job. 
Eventually, she realized she needed help, so she went to the VA and they diagnosed her with PTSD and connected her with a therapist.  But Jenn still struggled.  At one point, she was living out of her car and ended up getting arrested.  That’s when she was connected with an organization called Give an Hour, which matches veterans with mental health professionals who donate their services free of charge to our veterans. 
Through Give an Hour, Jenn found a therapist who helped her manage her post-traumatic stress, and helped her to slowly build a successful life for herself.  And today, years later, Jenn is a licensed practical nurse.  She is a home owner.  She is the mother of a beautiful six-year-old daughter and an adorable baby boy.  And she spends much of her free time volunteering to encourage other veterans to reach out for help as well.   
Jenn credits her therapist and the folks at Give an Hour for saving her life.  Jenn is here today –- Jenn?  (Applause.)  So proud of you. 
But that’s not the end of the story.  Jenn knows that she’ll have to deal with these issues for the rest of her life.  And that’s why we need to do everything we can to support and sustain more efforts like Give an Hour well into the future.  Because an organization like Give an Hour isn’t a one-stop solution.  It’s a vital part of a much larger constellation of support for our veterans and military families. 
So we also need organizations like NMSI for our military kids.  We need organizations like Blue Star Families for caregivers and family members.  No single group, no single grant can do the job on its own.  It’s going to take all of us. 
It’s going to take nonprofits doing the work on the ground.  It’s going to take money, resources.  So we need more donors and philanthropic institutions to get involved.  It’s going to take businesses and government doing their part.  And it’s going to take all of us as neighbors and as citizens to understand who the military families are in our own communities, because there will never be enough organizations or institutions to reach every single military family.  But there are more than 300 million Americans, and it is up to us to step up and fill the gap.
So if you’re watching this at any point in time, if you work with a veteran, if you worship with a military family, if there is a Gold Star classmate at your child’s school, find a way to reach out.  Pick up a shift in the carpool.  Volunteer at the VFW, or donate money to a charity that serves these families.  But do something to show these families that we’re here for them, now and in the years ahead. 
That’s what Joining Forces is about.  It’s about reaching out to these heroes.  Because we know they make our community stronger, they make our businesses more productive, they make our schools more vibrant.  It’s about turning the feelings we get from those wonderful homecoming videos into real, concrete actions that lift up our military families and show them how much they mean to us.  And it’s about doing it not just now, but for the rest of their lives.
And so I want to thank all of the incredible philanthropic and nonprofit leaders for taking this huge step toward making that a reality.  And, of course, to all the military families here today and across the country, I just want you to know that this is just a first step.  We’re going to get more donors involved in this effort.  We’re going to keep reaching out to people all across the country so that no matter where you live or work, you will be surrounded by a country that truly honors your service and your sacrifice, now and in the years and decades ahead.  That is our pledge to you. 
So thank you all again for your tremendous service to our nation.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.  (Applause.) 
END
11:56 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 23, 2014
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Joining Forces Meet-and-Greet with Military Families
Fort Campbell
Campbell, Kentucky
1:10 P.M. CDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, everybody.  Go ahead and sit, sit.  I just wanted to say thank you for having me here, and Michelle here, today. 
I am a military mom.  Our son Beau was deployed to Iraq for a year in 2008, just before we were elected.  So it was kind of bittersweet that Beau went off to war, and then we were elected.  And actually, the night of the election, as we walked out, we had Beau -- we Skyped with Beau so that he could walk out with us onto the stage.  So it was a really incredible experience.
But I just want to say, that year away was a really tough year for the Biden family.  And our community stepped up, and it meant so much to me and to Beau’s family and his children.  And so Michelle and I are just hoping that -- one of the reasons we started Joining Forces was to have other Americans honor you and respect you and lift you up like I was lifted up.  So that’s why we started it. 
We’ve been working together -- it’s been three years.  It’s our anniversary.  So thank you all for what you do, because I know how tough it is.  So thank you.   
Michelle?
MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks, Jill.  We’re just thrilled to be here.  And we’re honored to be celebrating the third year of Joining Forces here at Fort Campbell with all of you. 
Unlike Jill, I wasn’t a military mom.  I wasn’t a Blue Star family member.  I didn’t know much about the military, and I was probably more like the average American.  Because when one percent of the country is serving and protecting the freedoms of the other 99 percent, it’s very easy for the other 99 percent to take that for granted.
And I first was exposed to the military community on the campaign trail.  I remember that we would do these gatherings with moms, women -- mostly working women -- because I wanted to hear through -- for my husband what were some of the challenges of working women out there.  And everywhere we went, I heard the voice of a woman that I hadn’t heard before, and it was your voice.  And I was just awed and blown away by what I heard through those voices, the challenges you all face.
Dealing with everything that I was dealing with -- a spouse traveling, a job, kids -- we didn’t deal with multiple moves, but I learned about the challenges that happen when you move from base to base to base; the way your kids have to adjust on a dime.  And doing it knowing that the person you love is in harm’s way.  And those stories moved me in a way that I didn’t expect. 
And one of the things I thought was, most Americans don’t know you.  They don’t come on these bases.  They don’t hear your story.  And I felt like if we had the honor of serving this country as President and First Lady, then I was going to help be that voice.  I was going to help shine a light on your lives, because I knew that the rest of the country would respond with the same level of compassion and wanting to step up and support you as I felt.
And it just so happened that Jill had the same passion.  We didn’t even know -- it was on that night when our families connected on that stage that we talked about the kind of things that were important to us.  And military families was at the top of my list, and it was for Jill.  And we knew then and there we were going to work to start a movement that would get this country to rally around your families in a way that would show our gratitude and appreciation for the sacrifices you made for all of us.
And now, we’re in the third year of that initiative.  And you all should know that the country has responded just as I would have thought.  No one tells us no.  We ask them and they do it, and they’re doing it for you -- sort of, kind of for us, but mostly for you.  (Laughter.) 
And what we hope is that over these years, at some point, you’re starting to feel this work on the ground where you are.  And that’s important for us.  And we always say when we meet with families, you’ve got to keep giving us feedback.  Let us know what more we can do, because Joining Forces will not end when our husbands leave office.  Our goal is to make sure that every President, every First, Second Lady, every Vice President takes on this initiative. 
Because just because these wars are coming to a close doesn’t mean your issues stop.  In fact, that’s when the hard work begins -- with the transitions you all have to make as your loved ones come back and they’re looking for jobs, and you’re trying to get the benefits that you’ve earned, and you’re still serving this country.  America needs to remember that you’re still out here. 
And as far as our military kids go, oh, man, you guys are heroes -- beyond heroes.  It is just amazing how poised and mature and confident and selfless you all are, knowing that you hold your families down and allow your parents to do what you do because you all keep your stuff together.  And most people don’t know what you go through, and sometimes it feels like it’s hard.  But let me tell you, we have seen that kids like you go on to do amazing things because of the challenges that you faced.  So it may not feel that way now, particularly when you’re in high school, but let me tell you, we see interns all over the place and when they are Blue Star family kids, they are outstanding.
So we are so proud of you all.  We’re proud of what you have done to serve us.  You all have served as much as your parents have served.
So we look forward to meeting with all of you.  We’re going to be up here like a wedding, taking pictures with all of you guys.  (Laughter.)  But the main message that Jill and I came here to deliver is, thank you.  Thank you from the bottom of our hearts.  You have touched my life in a way that you can’t imagine.  And hopefully, Joining Forces is just a small way that we’re touching your life.
So with that, we look forward to meeting you guys one on one up here.  Congratulations on just being fabulous.  (Laughter.)  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END  
1:18 P.M. CDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 23, 2014
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at Joining Forces Veterans Jobs Summit and Career Forum
Fort Campbell
Campbell, Kentucky
11:24 A.M. CDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you.  Good morning, everyone.  As a proud Blue Star mom, I’m thrilled to be here with all of you today.  And thank you, Major General McConville, for that kind introduction.
I’d like to recognize the extraordinary military spouses and families who are here with us today.  And of course, to my dear friend, the First Lady, Michelle Obama, I cannot believe that it’s already been three years since we started Joining Forces. 
From the very beginning, Michelle and I both knew we wanted to work together to support our military families.  And we knew that the American people would come out in full force.  But I think it’s safe to say that we have been overwhelmed by the support shown for our servicemembers, our veterans and our military families.
From employers hiring veterans, to schools recognizing military kids, to non-profits supporting military families, America has stepped up.  Our colleges and universities have stepped, as well.  As an educator myself, making sure our veterans who return to campus communities succeed is particularly important to me, so I could not be prouder of these efforts.
And those of you who have tried to figure out your GI Bill benefits, as you know, it’s not always that easy.  That’s why the administration’s new GI Bill Comparison Tool is so important.  With this new tool, you can get answers you need using information that you already know about yourself, like how long you’ve served and your current status.  And when you type in the name of a school that you might like to attend, you can figure out how much the tuition will be, how much you’ll get for books, for housing, the school’s graduation rate, and the loan default rates -- just with a few clicks.
Another area we have made real progress in is supporting our military spouses.  We all know the sacrifices that they make -- running households and raising kids alone through deployments, packing and unpacking after each and every move, and often while maintaining full-time jobs themselves.  So that’s why, nearly three years ago, I was honored to join military leaders, businesses and the Chamber of Commerce to announce the Military Spouse Employment Partnership.  Our goal was to develop career and educational opportunities for military spouses. 
When we started, there were just under 60 companies who had signed on.  I am thrilled to say that, today, there are 228 partner employers.  More than 1.8 million jobs have been posted.  And as of this month, more than 60,000 military spouses have been hired.  (Applause.) 
The Military Spouse Employment Partnership has made a difference for thousands of military families -- people like Jessica Patrick, who’s here today -- an Army spouse, a mother of two, and a registered nurse. 
Just under a year ago, Jessica left her job and was looking for the next opportunity.  Having already moved multiple times, and knowing that future moves were likely, she was looking for a military-friendly company -- companies that understood that military spouses have qualities they wanted, like dedication, flexibility, a strong work ethic, and endless energy.  She was recruited through Humana’s Veterans and Military Spouse Hiring initiative.  Jessica said, knowing that they understood the gaps in her resume were because of the moves of -- with the military, it reduced the stress she experienced in previous job interviews. 
Jessica knew she was qualified for the position, and went into the interview with the confidence she needed to succeed.  She loves her job and the flexibility it has offered her and her family.  And because she telecommutes 100 percent of the time, her family’s move next year won’t impact her job.  More importantly, she sees her employment as giving her the chance to grow in her role, and advance in her career without having to start over.  So now, Jessica is even looking to obtain a master’s degree.  Good for you, Jessica.  (Applause.) 
Stories like Jessica’s are exactly why Michelle and I started Joining Forces.  From sponsoring hiring fairs for veterans and spouses, to creating a mentoring program for 10,000 military wives and servicewomen, to helping spouses further their education, the Military Spouse Employment Network and others are playing an important role, and we are grateful for your support.
But we are not stopping.  As more and more Americans understand what it means to serve, the more they are ready to step up and do their part.
And now, it is my great honor to introduce someone getting ready to transition to civilian life in the coming weeks.  He is the father of four, the son of a Vietnam veteran, and a self-proclaimed “army brat” who grew up all over the world.  Please join me in welcoming and thanking him for his service to our country, Sergeant Aaron Wanless.  (Applause.)
END
11:31 A.M. CDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 22, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk
Cabinet of Ministers Club
Kyiv, Ukraine 
1:40 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Prime Minister, let me begin by thanking you both for your hospitality, but much more importantly for the incredible leadership you’ve shown under very, very, very difficult circumstances.
We just celebrated Easter, and Easter is supposed to be a season of peace, of family, and a time when we all come together.  But today there are some who are trying to pull Ukraine apart.  Ukraine is in the struggle for its very future. 
When I left the hotel this morning, the hotel management asked me to sign their book that they have before I left.  And as I told you, Mr. Prime Minister, I signed, “Ukraine united, Joe Biden.”  I wish it were that easy, just signing my signature.  But the truth of the matter is we, the United States, stand with you and all the Ukrainian people on a Ukraine united.  And I’ll say at the top we do not recognize -- we do not recognize -- Russia’s actions in the Crimea. 
But today, as I said, there are some trying to pull Ukraine apart.  And you have -- we’re in the struggle for your very future.  There’s been a lot of talk about geopolitics, about East and West.  But here in Ukraine, people know that it’s about something much more fundamental.  It’s not about geopolitics; it’s about unity.  It’s about independence.  And at its most basic level, it’s about restoring respect and dignity.
For months Ukrainians braved bone-chilling, cold weather and stood down snipers’ bullets in the Maidan.  And I know not every Ukrainian feels the same way about the Maidan.  I understand that.  But it’s my view that all Ukrainians can agree on the core idea that government exists to serve the people.  The people do not exist to serve the government.  And that the people of the Ukraine -- of Ukraine should have the right to choose their own future.
I offer my personal sympathies to the families of those who laid down their lives for this cause.  These heroes remind us of the true cost of a better future and the nobility of those who reach for it.  I came here to Kyiv to let you know, Mr. Prime Minister, and every Ukrainian know that the United States stands with you and is working to support all Ukrainians in seeking a better future.
The road ahead obviously, as we discussed at length both here and in Washington, Mr. Prime Minister, is difficult.  And you should know, as I told you at the outset, you will not walk this road alone.  We will walk it with you.
Today, the Prime Minister and I talked about the work before us.  We discussed the most acute problem, the most acute matter facing the Ukrainian people, the ongoing threat to their country’s sovereignty and its territorial integrity.  I’ll say it again, Ukraine is and must remain one country from Lviv to Kharkiv down to the Black Sea -- one country, one united Ukraine. 
The United States supports a strong, united Ukraine with productive and peaceful relationships with both the East and the West, with both Russia and Europe.  And that's a goal that I know you share, Mr. Prime Minister.  But no nation -- no nation -- has the right to simply grab land from another nation.  No nation has that right.  And we will never recognize Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea, and neither will the world, as was demonstrated by the overwhelming vote that took place in the Security Council in the General Assembly.
No nation should threaten its neighbors by massing troops along the border.  We call on Russia to pull back these forces.  No nation should stoke instability in its neighbor’s country.  We call on Russia to stop supporting men hiding behind masks in unmarked uniforms, sowing unrest in Eastern Ukraine.  And we have been clear that more provocative behavior by Russia will lead to more costs and to greater isolation.  The United States has demonstrated, as Ukraine has, that it supports diplomatic efforts to deescalate the situation. 
Mr. Prime Minister, your government has taken important steps to uphold the agreement reached in Geneva just last week, including putting forward a broad amnesty bill for separatists, which you’ve done, who give up -- amnesty for those who give up buildings and their weapons.  You’ve also sent senior representatives to the east to help the OSCE move the process forward.  You’ve met with the head of that delegation, as I did yesterday. 
We’ve heard a lot from Russian officials in the past few days, but now it’s time for Russia to stop talking and start acting.  Act on the commitments that they made:  to get pro-Russian separatists to vacate buildings and checkpoints, accept amnesty and address their grievances politically; to get out on the record calling for the release of all illegally occupied buildings.  That's not a hard thing to do, and to send senior Russian officials to work with the OSCE in the east.  These are commitments made; they should be fulfilled.  We need to see these kinds of concrete steps.  We need to see them without delay.  We will not allow this to become an open-ended process.  Time is short in which to make progress. 
In this time of testing, the instability in the east is only one of several challenges Ukraine and the government must confront.  It also has challenges in politics, economics and in energy.
Today the Prime Minister briefed me on preparations for the presidential election on March [sic] the 25th, and his aspirations for constitutional reform and a presentation on May the 15th.  The United States for this election is providing substantial assistance to make sure that they are clean and closely monitored so that nobody on the 26th of May can question their legitimacy.  I’m encouraged and I’m genuinely encouraged to see so many people in the east rejecting violence, choosing the ballot box over bullets to determine Ukraine’s future.  And I’m all -- and I was pleased to hear about Ukraine’s significant progress on constitutional reform and decentralization.
This may be the most important election in the history of Ukraine.  This is a chance to make good on the aspirations of the overwhelming majority of Ukrainians east and west and every part of this country.  For a Ukraine that empowers local governance and respects and protects different linguistic and cultural traditions, but fundamentally holds together as a single state -- united and sovereign.  There’s such possibilities ahead, Mr. Prime Minister. 
Ukrainians have also made clear that after an era of staggering public theft -- not debt, public theft -- that they will no longer accept corruption from public officials.  Your former leader had to run in hiding for fear that after everyone saw the excesses to which his theft had taken him and others.  The fact of the matter is I’m of the view -- and it’s presumptuous to ever tell another man what his country thinks -- but I’m of the view that Ukrainians east, west, north and south are just sick and tired of the corruption.
Mr. Prime Minister, Ukraine’s new law on government procedure -- procurement I should say represents a first important step in dealing with this kleptocracy.  The United States is ready to help Ukraine take further steps to build transparent institutions, to win back the trust of the people.  And just as corruption can have no place in the new Ukraine, neither can anti-Semitism or bigotry.  Let me say that again, neither can anti-Semitism or bigotry.  No place.  None.  Zero.  The United States condemns in the strongest possible terms all threats and attacks against Ukrainian Jewish communities as well as Roma and others, as you do, as well, I know, Mr. Prime Minister.
Mr. Prime Minister, you and I also discussed the efforts to stabilize and strengthen Ukraine’s economy.  Just last week the United States government signed a bill proposed by our administration for a $1 billion loan guarantee agreement with Ukraine.  The United States has also been a driving force behind the IMF, working to provide a multi-billion package to help Ukraine address the immediate needs and get Ukraine on a stronger path.  I expect the IMF package to be finalized imminently, and I congratulate you and your government here in Ukraine for having made the difficult -- and they are difficult, very difficult -- economic reforms to get this done.
The Prime Minister and I also spoke about energy.  An American team is currently in the region working with Ukraine and its neighbors to increase Ukraine’s short-term energy supply.  And I’ve been on the telephone with many of your neighbors, as you know, talking about the way to increase that supply.  And more teams are coming to support long-term improvements so that no nation -- let me be precise, so that Russia can no longer use energy as a political weapon against Ukraine and Europe.
With the right investments and the right choices, Ukraine can reduce its energy dependence and increase its energy security.  We will stand with you to help in every way we can for you to accomplish that goal.
Finally, even as we pursue diplomacy we’re also providing nonlethal support to Ukraine security services to deal with the challenges that have arisen.  We’re providing communications gear, bomb disposal technology, transportation and engineering equipment for Ukraine to protect against infiltrators and deal with explosive threats.  And our security support now totals nearly $20 million. 
Mr. Prime Minister, I know we’ll be talking again, and I’m confident that you will continue to be as consistent and persistent as you have been in order to bring about the kind of change that's needed.  We will stand with you.  It’s been inspiring to watch you and your fellow countrymen.  For all the obstacles placed in your way, you continue to move forward with resolve -- genuine resolve. 
And I’m proud to affirm that you do so with friendship, partnership and strong support from the United States of America that will not go away.  God bless your country.  And God willing, we will, in fact, see a much better day for your country.
PRIME MINISTER YATSENYUK:  Thank you, Mr. Vice President.  Let me shift to my native language. 
(As interpreted) Mr. Vice President, between our two countries there is an agreement about strategic partnership.  And this agreement is not only on the paper.  This agreement is in action.  The goal of this agreement is the development of free democratic and stable Ukrainian society and government.  The goal of this agreement and objective of it is our joint work and cooperation in providing stability and peace on the continent.  The goal of this agreement is to support the strategic relations between the United States and Ukraine.
We value the position of the United States and the support that the Ukrainian people receive from the United States during the past few months -- the Ukrainian people that choose their own way to manage their own country, the people of Ukraine that continues its fight for its rights, democracy and for the -- for having Ukraine as a successful country. 
We separately would like to thank the administration of the United States of America, the Congress and the Senate for the allocation of $1 billion as a financial assistance for the Ukrainian economy.  Ukraine asked and adopted several necessary even though complicated decisions and difficult decisions in order to reestablish financial programs with the international financial institutions.
And when we say about the package of difficult reforms, we are saying that these reforms in the packet was not passed from the IMF.  It was passed and adopted for Ukraine.  Ukraine needs real reforms. 
Mr. Vice President, we value the level of technical assistance that is provided by the government of the United States.  I separately would like focus on the corruption issue.  The government of Ukraine understands and is conscious that the money is given only to those countries that actually overcome and fight corruption.  And one of the key goals and objectives of my government and the new president that should be elected on May 25th of this year is real fight against corruption and victory over corruption.
And on the other note I would like to underscore our joint vision with regard to the needs of constitutional reforms in Ukraine.  And we implement -- we are planning to implement the constitutional reform, not just to meet the requirements of Geneva agreement, but rather to answer the request of Russia.  The constitutional reform in the country is the way to restore the balance of power.  This is the requirement of the Ukrainian people.  Thus within the constitutional reform we plan to provide additional power to regions and give the Ukrainian regions opportunity to have independent financial and budget policy in order for them to have special status for national minorities and language of national minorities, including the Russian language and make sure that every citizen of Ukraine would be able to affect the local and the central government.  Thus the constitutional reform should be implemented and must be implemented.  And it is inadmissible when the constitution is written and drawn for specific president.  Constitution should be drawn for the Ukrainian citizens and Ukrainian people. 
As to our talk about the energy, Mr. Vice President, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine is ready for cooperation in the broadest sense with both U.S. and European companies.  We do require investments into our energy sector, and the best response for energy independence from Russia will be the presence here in Ukraine of European and American investors, and among other issues related to review, joint-use and modernization of the Ukrainian gas transportation system. 
As to the elections, we did discuss this topic, and we appreciate the support of the United States in the build-up of democracy in Ukraine.  We clearly understand that whatever happens in the east, and is being supported by the Russia Federation, has, among other goals, the goal of disrupting the presidential elections, while the goal of the government is to conduct fair and transparent elections.
Even now we have two dozens of candidates who run in this election who represent the whole spectrum of the political parties of Ukraine.  And each of them could receive the needed support from the voters.  Ukraine does require a legitimately elected president, something that Russia does not need.  We will carry out the presidential elections and the elections in Ukraine, which will be conducted with the involvement of both the OECD observers and observers from the international community, should be open, fair, transparent and legitimate.  Let me reiterate Ukraine should have a new president who will support the reforms -- curbing corruption, introducing changes and amendments to the constitution of Ukraine, who will support integration with Europe, energy independence, fostering of democracy and independence of the Ukrainian state.
Separately we discussed with Mr. Vice President our northern neighbors.  Let me reiterate the position of the Ukrainian government once again.  Never, under no circumstance Ukraine would acknowledge the annexation of Crimea.  We will require from our Russian neighbors to immediately get their special forces out of the eastern region of Ukraine, so get its military forces from Crimea, thus closing down this ignoble page in history of occupation of our territory by the Russian troops.  We believe that in this century and in the modern world, no country should be allowed to behave like an armed bandit.
And it’s inadmissible, especially for those countries who are standing members of the Security Council of the United Nations.  And it’s inadmissible to a country that used to be a member of G8.  Russia should stick to its international commitments and obligations.  We are not asking anything from Russia.  What we demand from them is one thing and only, they should deliver on the international commitments, and they should not behave as gangsters in the modern century.
Ukraine has signed the first part of the political part of the association agreement with the European Union, and for us this association agreement lays the course that is required to successfully implement reforms.  This is the best agenda for Ukraine.  In order to implement the reforms and to make Ukraine a country that meets the highest standards of democracy, that meets the highest standards of curbing corruption, that meets the highest standards of protecting human rights and the rights of citizens.
We acknowledge the challenges that Ukraine is facing.  And our government will deliver difficult but so much needed reforms for Ukraine.  We would like to thank once again the government of the United States and the people of the United States for their support.  You also witnessed a very difficult path in developing your nation.  We are going through this path.  You became a successful nation.  We are becoming a successful nation.  If we work together side by side so that the people in the United States and people in Ukraine will live better, and the world will feel safer, then for sure, we’ll all be successful. 
Thank you, Mr. Vice President, for your visit.
END
2:06 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 22, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at a Meeting with Ukrainian Legislators
Rada
Kyiv, Ukraine 
10:03 A.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.  And I want to thank my colleagues for bringing me back home.  For 36 years I sat in our legislature, and I used to actually have this seat in our -- I was the chairman of our committee.  Thank you for making me feel relevant again, back in a legislative body.
I’m honored, and I mean this sincerely, I’m honored to be with you all, all members of the Rada representing the whole of Ukraine.
I signed the book in the hotel as I was leaving today.  The management asked me to sign their book, and I signed, “Ukraine united, Joe Biden.”  And as I look here, this is Ukraine united -- center, south, east, west.  And as someone who has held high public office in my country for now 40 years and just because I’ve been around, literally met every major leader in the world in the last 40 years, I don't -- I want you to know I do not underestimate the incredible pressure you all are under.  I do not underestimate the challenge that you all face.  And I do not underestimate the frustration you must feel when someone like me comes along and says this is a great opportunity for you.  (Laughter.)  As my mother would say, but for the honor, I’d just as soon as pass the opportunity.
But the truth of the matter is your fellow countrymen expect a whole lot of you right now.  Their expectations are high.  The demands on you are -- my guess is are fairly extreme.  And in addition to that, we have -- there is -- John Kennedy, President Kennedy wrote a book that became very famous called “Profiles in Courage,” and it listed those men and women in our country who had taken political positions that were overwhelmingly interest of the United States of America, but not in their personal interests.  That's a profile in courage.  I hope none of you have to appear in the first edition of the “Profiles in Courage in Ukraine,” but my expectation is some of you are going to have to make some really difficult, difficult personal decisions.
But you’re facing such unrest and uncertainty, and we can speak a little bit more about that today.  But I also think -- it’s easy for me to say -- there’s an expression in English, it says, an expert is anyone from out of town with a briefcase.  Well, I don't have a briefcase, and I’m not an expert.  But I have an opinion, and I speak for the President of the United States, and he shares the same opinion.  And that is that this is a second opportunity to make good on the original promise made by the Orange Revolution.  This is a genuine opportunity to get right what is always difficult to do the first time when coming out from under the oppression or control of another power. 
You’re a month away from -- I would respectfully suggest, although I will be probably criticized by the press for saying it, what hopefully will be and may be the most important election in Ukrainian history, and that is that you have an opportunity, a chance to bring about an era of reform and democratic renewal that you all hoped for two, five, 10, 15 years ago to lay the groundwork for an even more united and more prosperous Ukraine.
In speaking with your acting President, I was referencing the personal bravery and heroism of Ukrainians is well known.  You are a strong, strong, strong people.  And I’m not being solicitous.  I mean it is real.  And you face very daunting problems and some might say humiliating threats that are taking place indirectly.  And -- but the opportunity to generate a united Ukraine, getting it right, is within your grasp.  And we want to be your partner, your friend in the project.  And we’re ready to assist.
I have an expression I use as I’ve gone around the world through my career is you never tell another man or woman what’s in their interest.  They know their interest better than you know their interest.  And so I want you to know that we are not suggesting we have the answers for you, but we’re merely suggesting that we stand ready to stand with you in every endeavor that you undertake to generate the united prosperous and coherent Ukraine you’re all fighting for.
And to the extent that we can be of small assistance in you holding a free election on May the 25th, we want to be part of that.  To the extent that we can help in stabilizing and strengthening Ukraine’s economy by helping you withstand the unfair economic pressure being thrust upon you, we stand ready to do that, and I say the American people stand ready -- not just Barack Obama and Joe Biden -- but the American people.
As you all know well we have a significant Ukrainian-American population.  We stand with you.  And it is not just a foreign policy judgment, it is a personal -- it’s an emotional commitment, as well, by millions of Americans. 
And as you attempt to pursue energy security, there’s no reason why you cannot be energy secure.  I mean there isn’t.  It will take time.  It takes some difficult decisions, but it’s collectively within your power and the power of Europe and the United States.  And we stand ready to assist you in reaching that.  Imagine where you’d be today if you were able to tell Russia:  Keep your gas.  It would be a very different world you’d be facing today.  It’s within our power to alter that.  It will take some time, but it’s within our power.  Very difficult decisions, but within our power.
Also to be very blunt about it, and this is a delicate thing to say to a group of leaders in their house of parliament, but you have to fight the cancer of corruption that is endemic in your system right now.  It’s not just the United States.  You need a court system that not only you and your people, but the rest of the world assumes can actually adjudicate fairly disputes among people.  But you have a chance.  You have a chance.  The constitutional reforms that you are envisioning now are ones that some of you have fought for in various ways your entire career, a balance of power between the parliament and the President.  You’ve tried it two different ways.  I think you’ve figured it out for you -- not what we think -- what you think is the correct balance.
The decentralization and empowering of local communities -- we call that devolution of power back home -- local communities able to elect their own local officials, control their own budgets, elect their councils.  And as I said, maybe if you look around the world at every country that has in the last 30 years come out from under the yoke of another, the hardest thing to put in place is, as I find it around the world, is a court system, is a judicial system.  In a sense it maybe is the single most important thing that can occur in any country.  And it’s hard.  It’s really difficult. 
But it’s totally within your power, and sometimes -- presumptuous of me to say this -- but sometimes it’s -- a crisis spawns the commitment, and the desire, the willingness to make some of these bold decisions. 
So it is -- I don't want to exaggerate our role or exaggerate what we -- how strongly we feel, but the United States supports the rights, the freedoms and the fundamental dignity of the people of Ukraine, all the people of Ukraine.
And you may have different traditions.  It’s not quite the same, but we understand different traditions in our country -- not as deeply as you do, but we are the most heterogeneous democracy in the world.  We’re soon going to get the point where over 50 percent of the United States of America is made up of people of non-European stock; the majority of the American people are not of European origin in 2020.  We understand.  We have millions of Muslims.  We have hundreds -- but it’s not quite the same.  We’re not up against a border.  We’re not sitting against a border of another powerful nation.
And so -- but, we, in fact -- these different traditions, different languages, and sometimes different perspectives, but the one thing I’ve observed, even with what’s going on in the east, is that there is a much greater desire to call oneself a Ukrainian than to call oneself anything else.  And that’s a major, major, major unifying power, no matter how different the traditions are.
So I’m confident -- presumptuous of me to say this -- I’m confident that in your constitutional reforms, you will find a way to guarantee those traditions and at the same time strengthen Ukrainian unity.  And to the extent that the United States of America can be of assistance in that effort, we stand ready to do that.
I thank you -- and I mean this sincerely -- for the honor of being able to speak here in the Rada, or at least a committee room of the Rada.
END
10:15 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 23, 2014
Remarks by the Vice President and Dr. Biden to the Human Rights Campaign Los Angeles Dinner
J.W. Marriott Los Angeles LA Live
Los Angeles, California
7:41 P.M. PDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Chad, for that kind introduction.  Joe and I are so proud to be with you tonight, and you are doing a phenomenal job leading HRC.  (Applause.) 
Hello, Los Angeles, my name is Jill Biden.  (Applause.)  I am with you tonight as an educator who knows the kind of bullying and harassment that some of my students face in the classroom, and the rejection they encounter at home. 
I am with you tonight as a military mom and someone who cares deeply for our service members and their families --(applause) -- who saw the burden that “don’t ask, don't tell” and DOMA placed on so many of our military families who serve this nation with just as much courage and patriotism and sacrifices as any other military family.  (Applause.)
And I am with you tonight as a mother and a grandmother -- in fact, our granddaughter Finnegan is with us.  I, like you, want my children and grandchildren to grow up in an America where no matter who you are or whom you love, you are treated with dignity and respect -- (applause) -- an America where your rights can't disappear from one state to the next, so that gay parents from California have the same rights when they take their kids to visit grandparents on Arizona.  That's the kind of country we want to live in.  And for God’s sake, an America where the Vice President of the United States can speak up for basic human rights and equality and it’s not breaking news.  (Applause.)
I am so proud of Joe and his commitment.  Tonight, we celebrate the work that you do to change hearts and minds and open up opportunities for every American from our classrooms, to our boardrooms, to our locker rooms.  And I’m with you tonight and always ready to finish the important work that remains.  I am here with another ally and champion for equality, a man whose life purpose stems from a profound commitment to civil rights, a man who always speaks from the heart.  Please join me in welcoming my husband, our Vice President, Joe Biden.  (Applause.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much, Jill.  (Applause.)  Thank you, so please, please sit down.  I know it shocks you to hear that I sometimes speak my mind.  (Laughter.)  As a matter of fact, someone said not long ago no one ever doubts what Biden says, the problem is sometimes he says all that he thinks.  (Laughter.) 
And I assure you it was no surprise in the Biden household when I spoke out on “Meet the Press.” 
But, folks, before I begin I’d like to introduce you to my best friend in the world, my sister, Valerie, and her son, who is an attorney out here in Los Angeles, and my granddaughter.  Our granddaughter has come along with us, and the reason she’s with us is that I want her to understand, which she is now only beginning to understand, that what she thinks and all her generation thinks is starting to be thought by older folks, too.  (Laughter and applause.)
And so, ladies and gentlemen, let me introduce you to my sister, Valerie Biden, her son Cuffe -- actually it’s not Biden.  She’s married.  Valerie Owens, her son Cuffe, and my granddaughter.  Oh, there they are.  (Applause.)
It’s easy to think the way we do when everyone who you know and respect thinks the same way.  Chad, thank you for your generosity and your kind comments.  And, Attorney General Harris, you have always been there.  It’s never been a question for you.
And Congressman -- Mark?  Is Mark here?  I know he’s out there somewhere.  I believe he is.  Congressman, thank you for your great support.  And, Mr. Mayor, thank you for the passport to come back into the city.  (Applause.)  And, Ambassador David Heebner, I want to thank you as well. 
Chad, I want to thank you as well for the kind words about Jill’s advocacy.  Folks, if you had known how Jill felt about standing before and speaking before large crowds seven years ago, you would marvel that she stood up here.  (Applause.)  But she’s taking it in stride.  Jill has always been -- had a true north, a moral compass that no one has ever questioned, and she raised our three children and our five grandchildren -- she hasn’t raised them, but she has impacted them so that they really feel it in their bones that it’s all about fairness and equity, and never to settle for anything less.
It’s overused, but Harvey Milk said, “Hope will never be silent.”  And you have never, never been silent, nor have you ever lost hope -- even in some very, very difficult times.  It’s been a long struggle, and recently there’s been some real progress, but there’s so much left to do.
All of you spoke out and stepped up and came forward.  You came out and you marched.  You demanded to be recognized, demanded your constitutional rights, demanded a basic American Dream.  You demanded respect.
And because of what all of you have done, my granddaughter is going to grow up in a better country, a more just country, and a more fair country.  (Applause.)
And, folks, I know -- I know not like you -- but I know it wasn’t easy.  Many of you paid a personal and a professional price for stepping up and speaking out.  But your tenacity, your integrity and, yes, your physical courage and your pride bent the moral arc of this nation, and it’s finally moving in the right direction.
My mother used to have an expression, and I’m serious about this, she said, Joey, bravery resides in every heart, and the time will come when it will be summoned. 
Every one of you in this room stepped up.  Every one of you stepped up.  I’m astonished by the bravery that resides in the heart of each and every one of you in this room.  I’ve been going around the country for a long time, and campaigns and doing my business as Vice President, and I constantly am thanked and given a great deal more credit than I deserve.  My main purpose in being here tonight is to say thank you.  Thank all of you.  Your actions not only liberated millions, millions in the LGBT community, but here’s the point I don't think you fully understand, you liberated tens of millions of straight guys and straight women.  (Laughter and applause.)  No, no, you have.  You have.  (Applause.)
Those of you who are old enough -- those of you who are old enough, 20 years ago, if four guys were sitting in a restaurant and there was a gay waiter and as he left the table, one of them made fun of it, the other three would remain silent.  Not today.  You freed them.  (Applause.)  You freed them to speak up because now they know -- they know they're not the exception, they know they're the majority.  They know because of you.
And with regard to my being on “Meet the Press,” besides I told the President when he asked me to be Vice President two things:  I wasn’t going to wear any funny hats and I wasn’t changing my brand.  ((Laughter and applause.)  There was no way.  I’m too old, man.  I’m too old.  Seriously, seriously, just how could you remain silent any more.
I have had -- and I continue to have faith in the American people.  I believed five years ago, I believe today that they're so far ahead of the political leadership.  And when I spoke out, the great surprise, all of a sudden the polling data started rolling in and a majority -- an absolute majority of the American people agreed with what I said.  But it wasn’t because of what I said, it’s because of all the sacrifices all of you made.
It’s been the honor of my lifetime to work alongside of so many of you, and particularly to see what we’ve achieved in the last five years.  Together, as this has been mentioned already, we passed the Matthew Shephard Hate Crimes Prevention Act; repealed “don't ask, don't tell;” reauthorized the Violence Against Women Act with protections for services for the LGBT community; passed the Affordable Care Act so no one can be denied health care because of their sexual orientation or their gender identity.  (Applause.)
We argued the case along Edie Windsor in the high court of the land because we knew it was unconstitutional, simply wrong for the federal government to discriminate.  We filed a brief on Prop 8 because we believed the loving relationships you see in this room, and California, and my home state of Delaware, all around the nation cannot, should not be denied the freedom to marry.  It’s basic.  And we rejoiced -- we rejoiced as we saw that iconic picture of Kris and Sandra and Paul and Jeff joining hands in victory on the steps of the Supreme Court.  (Applause.)
But, folks, it’s a lot of progress in a relatively short time after this fight has begun, but guess what, there’s so much more to be done.  My grandkids, my children, and their kids are going to be shocked -- it shocks the conscience that at this very moment in American history, in some states, an employer can fire you just because of who you are or who you love.  It’s close to barbaric.  I mean think about this -- no, I really mean this, imagine, imagine 20 years from now, as America looks back, and says, how in the hell could that have ever been allowed?  (Applause.)  The country has moved on.  The American people have moved on.  It’s time for their Congress to move on and pass ENDA, pass ENDA now -- not tomorrow, now.  (Applause.) 
If you think about it, it’s outrageous we’re even debating this sucker.  I really mean it.  It’s almost beyond belief that today in 2014, I could say to you, because you’re employee in so many states, you’re fired because of who you love?  I mean think about that.  It is bizarre.  No, no, no, it really is.  It really is.  I don't even think most Americans even know that employers can do that.
And so, folks, look, I was raised by a truly gracious and decent man.  He taught me and my sister and my two brothers that -- a simple truth, that every single person in the world is entitled to be treated with dignity and respect.  And he taught us by his example, not by his lectures.
I can remember I was a junior in high school, and he was driving me into the city.  I lived in the suburbs, the city in Wilmington to apply for a job as a lifeguard in the city swimming pools.  And -- I was a pretty good lifeguard.  (Laughter.)   Matter of fact, when I ran for the United States Senate, they said, all Biden has ever been is a lifeguard.  (Laughter.)  I was 29.  But any rate, it was close to true.  (Laughter.)
But I’ll never forget it, he pulled up in front of the city courthouse where we went and made the application.  And he didn't want to park, he was dropping me off.  And we stopped at a red light.  When I looked over to my left, and there were two men kissing good-bye, and I looked, and it was the first time I’d seen that.  And my father looked at me and said, they love each other.  That's the end.  That's the end.  (Applause.)
But my point is because of you so many Americans have been freed.  Dignity and respect has to remain our North Star.  But as far as we still need to go, the rest of the world has so much further to go.
As you probably know I spend an awful lot of time traveling in foreign countries.  I’ve had the privilege of literally meeting every major head of state in the last 40 years because of the nature of my job in the Senate.  And I’ve traveled to most countries in the world, and I can tell you, they're looking to us as an example, as a champion of LGBT rights everywhere.  In almost 80 countries today, it’s a crime.  More than half -- almost more than half the countries in the U.N., it’s a crime to be gay.  It’s a crime.  In seven countries, it’s punishable by death.  And in many more places, LGBT people face violence, harassment, unequal treatment in the courts, mistreatment by the police, denial of health care, social isolation, always in the name of culture. 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, the world God willing is beginning to change.  To paraphrase Pope Francis of all things, (laughter) -- but think about this, think about what he said, one sentence he uttered, to paraphrase him, who are we to judge?  Who are they to judge you or me?  (Applause.)
In Nigeria, even supporting LGBT organizations can land you in prison for a decade.  Closer to home, in Jamaica, we hear corrective rape for lesbian women.  The world was outraged when we found out about genital mutilation that takes place in some African countries.  Corrective rape?  What in God’s name are we talking about?  How can a country that speaks in those terms be remotely considered to be a civil society?  (Applause.)
In June, the Russian government banned the dissemination of so-called propaganda of nontraditional sexual relations to young people.  And by the way, as the great Soviet dissident, Andrei Sakharov said, “A country that does not respect the rights of its citizens will not respect the rights of its neighbors.”  And we’re seeing that today.  We’re seeing that today in Ukraine.  (Applause.) 
Find me a country in the world that singles out a set of citizens, and I’ll guarantee you that country is where justice does not live.
Ladies and gentlemen, this week I met with a remarkable group of activists in the so-called Roosevelt Room in the West Wing, from all around the world, about eight of them.  They had one thing in common:  courage.  Many of them were taking incredible physical and personal risks in order to fight for the basic human rights, the rights of others.  One activist from India, a woman named Geethaw spoke of the importance of “street-to-street” connections between local LGBT organizations in different countries. 
Another young woman, working in Uganda, Wanja -- Uganda, a nation where you can go to prison for life for so-called aggravated homosexuality whatever the hell that is.  (Laughter.)  Aggravated homosexuality?  Whoa.  There are some sick people in the world.  (Laughter and applause.) 
But here’s what she said, she said, the LGBT community has been chosen in her country as pawns in the question of, where do we look West, or do we look East?  And she went on to say it shouldn’t be either East or West, it’s a basic human right.  (Applause.)
Well, ladies and gentlemen, let’s think about it in basic terms.  And I know you know it, but sometimes even you forget it, the single most basic of all human rights is the right to decide who you love.  It’s the single basic building block.  It is.  It’s the single most important human right that exists. 
And hate can never, never be defended because it’s a so-called cultural norm.  I’ve had it up to here with cultural norms.  (Applause.)  I really mean that.  A cultural norm, if it’s sick, it’s sick.  It’s simple.  There’s never a justification for a government or an individual politician to play up the bigotry and hatred.
A friend of mine who I’ve gotten to know years ago, Archbishop Desmond Tutu spoke out against what he called “a wave of hate” sweeping across his beloved continent against LGBT people.  He said, “Politicians who profit from exploiting this hate are fanning it.  They must not be tempted by the easy way to profit from fear and misunderstanding.”
And we have a simple obligation:  when it occurs, where it occurs, as individuals and as a government, we must speak up, speak out and do everything we can to confront it.
America’s strength, and I know you’re tired of hearing me say this the last six years, but America’s strength -- I really mean this -- does not lie in the exercise of its power.  It does not lie there.  It exercises -- it lies in the exercise of its values.  In every aspect of American foreign policy, we should have as the focus in our foreign policy that we lead not merely by the example of our power, but by the power of our example.  That's what makes us different.  That's what makes us strong.  I really mean that.  (Applause.)
Look, I don't want this just to be a rah-rah speech here.  I mean what I say, it’s clear we have a long road to travel to change hearts and minds and laws all around the world.  But we’re beginning to do it.  We’re beginning to do it.
I want to talk to you about what the President and I are doing to help us get there.  Barack and I believe that the rights of LGBT people is an inseparable part of America’s promotion of human rights around the world.  No, no, no, it really -- it cannot, is not distinguishable.  It’s a false distinction made in the past.  The first and most important thing this administration has done is to use the bully pulpit of the most powerful nation on Earth to stand up in defense of LGBT rights around the world.  It means speaking up against the criminalization of LBGT status or conduct, as President Obama has ordered all agencies working overseas to do.
It means our annual State Department report on human rights now speaks out by name -- naming countries that mistreat LGBT people.  It is consequential.
It means providing training and tools to our diplomats around the world so that they can integrate LGBT rights into how we do American foreign policy in the 21st century.  And by the way, five of these missions are now run by openly gay ambassadors.  (Applause.)
The second thing we’re doing and are going to continue to do is use foreign assistance to protect LGBT rights.  We’ve set up and contributed to a global equity fund which is working in over 50 countries to support unbelievably brave LGBT activists working on the ground, around the world often in unimaginably difficult and dangerous circumstances.
Thirdly, we offer emergency support to LGBT people in danger, including refugee status and asylum-seekers fleeing persecution. 
Fourth, we’re building as broad a coalition, as broad as we can.  We’re working with partners like Albania, which just added protections against hate crimes for sexual orientation and gender identity -- Albania.  Nepal -- Nepal, which is taking steps to recognize transgender citizens; Mongolia, which just held its first pride week last September.  (Applause.)  And Russia calls these countries backward?
We’re working with countries like Argentina, Brazil, France, Norway, Sweden and Mexico, as well on UN Human Rights Council, the World Bank, regional bodies like the Organization of American States and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We’re working with businesses who can vote with their capital for those economies that respect the rights of LGBT employees.  We’re supporting organizations such as the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center, which is working with grassroots advocates -- (applause) -- you all are working with grass-roots advocates all across China to help them start their own community organizations.
And we’re excited to work with you -— the Human Rights Campaign -— through your new Global Engagement Program, to which you take the same passion and remarkable courage you’ve brought to fighting for LGBT rights in this country to help people around the world. 
And, folks, we’re in the early days of a long, long fight.  But you should never underestimate the epiphanies that follow a culture that makes a breakthrough of conscience.  And that's what you helped start here.
As we used to say in the Senate, I’d like to make in closing a point of personal privilege.  I want to thank Chad for being the person he is.  (Applause.)  Now, let me explain what I mean by that.  You all know him.  He’s a good man.  But let me explain what I mean.  It was April of 2012.  I was campaigning for Democratic candidates around the country, and I was here in Los Angeles with leaders of the LGBT community of Southern California at the home of Michael Lombardo and Sonny Ward, and a young man, who was standing against the wall in the living room as I was answering questions, that young man was Chad.  And Chad asked me one of the most sincere and plaintive questions I’ve ever been asked in my political career, particularly on this issue.  He looked at me and just asked a simple question.  He said, Mr. Vice President, what do you think of me?  A simple, straightforward question:  What do you think -- I’d never meet him before.  What he was saying was, what do you think of me, I am a homosexual.  What do you think of me?
No one ever asked me that question before, and it made me sad to think that anyone -- any of you in this audience, any of my acquaintances, my friends, my employees who are gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender have to go through any part of your life looking at people who don't know you and wondering, what do they think of me.  What do you think of me?  What a profound question.
And all I could think of was, if all Americans understood that there are people with different sexual orientations in every walk of life, every sector of America, every nook and cranny of this country, and that you are no different.  You are us.  We are one.  And all I could think to say to Chad -- it was spontaneous was -- I wish every American could have been in the kitchen.  They always take me in through kitchens.  (Laughter.)  You think I’m kidding, I’m not.
I walked into Michael and Sonny’s home through the kitchen.  They were standing there, and their two beautiful, young children -- five and seven -- were standing between their parents.  And the first thing I did, the little girl put her arms out -- actually the little boy did first, so I bent down, crouched and gave them a big hug.  And we talked a little bit before I even said hi to Sonny who was standing at my right.  And after a few minutes, the little girl turned to her father and said, Daddy, is it okay if the Vice President comes out in the backyard and plays with me and you speak?  (Laughter.)  I swear to God.  By the way, I like kids better than people.  (Laughter.)
And all I could think of was, I mean this sincerely, folks, if every American could have just been there and seen the love these kids had for their parents, just seen how normal it all was in the perverted notion some people have, they wouldn’t have any doubt about what the right policy is, what the right thing to do.  And it reinforced in me the certitude that the only way to prevail is to continue to step up and speak out because we are all one.  People fear that which they do not know.  And you all continue to do that. 
That's why things are changing.  Not because of Barack Obama or Joe Biden, but because of you.  It’s powerful.  It’s powerful.
So I mean what I said at the front end, thank you for not only liberating people who have been persecuted and pummeled, but thank you for getting us in the way of liberating all of America.  It’s a fight we will win.  I don't have a single, solitary doubt in my mind.  I am absolutely confident my grandchildren’s generation has already moved and will continue to move far beyond the prejudice of the past and of today.  That's why I’m so confident that the future is only going to get better.
Just as some of you heard me say through the campaign, I will fight to ensure that my four granddaughters have every single, solitary opportunity I mean without exception that my grandsons have, and as long as I have a breath in me, I will not be satisfied till everyone in the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender community is afforded the dignity, the freedom and the equality that my father spoke so clearly of because that's the only way.  Only when you do that will we be a whole nation.  Only when you do that will we be a whole nation.  (Applause.)
God bless you all, God bless your families, and my God protect our troops.  (Applause.)  Thank you for what you do.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
                                      END                          8:14 P.M. PDT
    
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 19, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden, President Dalia Grybauskaite of Lithuania, and President Andris Berzins of Latvia
Presidential Palace
Vilnius, Lithuania
1:20 P.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT GRYBAUSKAITE:  (As interpreted.)  Good afternoon. So today we had an important meeting with U.S. Vice President Biden and Latvian President Berzins.  With our partners, we discussed the situation in Ukraine and its impact on the security of the Baltic States and Europe as a whole.  I see it as a threat not only to Ukraine but also to the entire international community.
We witnessed the use of brutal force to redraw the map of Europe and to undermine the postwar political architecture established in Europe.  We strongly condemn Russian actions on the territory of sovereign Ukraine.  We consider Sunday’s referendum and its results illegal.  The so-called referendum is a violation of the constitution of Ukraine, international law and the United Nations Charter. 
De facto Russia is carrying out the annexation of Crimea and this is happening very close to the borders of Lithuania.  The situation is a direct threat to our regional security.  Therefore, we must take all the necessary measures to ensure the security of Europe and the Baltic region. 
And this is what we discussed with Vice President Biden and Latvian President Berzins.  And I would like to thank the United States, especially, which immediately responded to the threats and took all necessary actions to ensure regional security, including the reinforcement of NATO-Baltic air policing mission. The United States is a strategic partner of Lithuania and the Baltic countries.  It has always firmly supported and continues to support our aspirations to ensure political, military, economic, and energy security in the region.
Thank you.
PRESIDENT BERZINS:  Ladies and gentlemen.  Dalia, thank you for hosting this event.  I was happy in a different way to see your country (inaudible.) 
Secondly, I would like to appreciate the visit of Vice President Joe Biden to the Baltic States.  Thank you for fulfilling your promise to come to us on this very, very important current stage.  But I would like to thank you for unwavering reassurance.  It is a clear reference to Article 5 by our NATO ally, the United States, to the security of Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, as expressed by the Vice President during our meeting earlier today.
 
The situation in Ukraine caused by annexation of Crimea is alarming.  This dramatically re-forms the European security structure with global implications.  Today we discussed the need for not only the immediate de-escalation of the situation, but also for long-term solutions for the security architecture.  I am glad that we could offer some practical steps with regard during our discussions today.  The same practical approach (inaudible) energy security -- there is the issue of supply need to be addressed.  As a good example here, I would like to underline the need to accelerate the construction of gas interconnection linking Poland, Lithuania and further on, to Latvia, and using storage facilities in Latvia.
Madam President, dear Vice President, we exchanged views on the situation inside Ukraine.  We share the opinion that Ukraine must be helped immediately, both politically and economically.  And I can only praise the United States and the European Union alike for very decisive steps outlining their commitment in this regard.
Yesterday, immediately after meeting with President Komorowski, I got a call from him and we agreed to coordinate our activities over the short term and also in longer term. (Inaudible) this common view on September in NATO meeting in U.K. This coordination and support of U.S. is very, very crucial in current stage and we are fully convinced that working closely together we will come to peaceful solution immediately for Ukraine and for all future activities for whole world.  This is most crucial for it.
Thank you.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.  Madam President, thank you for the hospitality.  It’s great to see you again, to be with you again, particularly in such magnificent surroundings.  Thank you for the hospitality.  And, Mr. President, it’s good to see you again.  It’s good to be back in Vilnius.
For 50 years, three embassies in exile in Washington, D.C. stood as a symbol of America’s commitment to freedom and independence and the people of the Baltics.  Next week, we celebrate the 10th anniversary of your membership in NATO as fellow free nations and close friends.  Nobody understands better than the people of the Baltics the value of freedom.  And nobody understands better the promise of a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
Today, I spoke with my colleagues, the Presidents of Lithuania and Latvia, about the situation in Ukraine.  Yesterday, I met with Estonian President Ilves and the President of Poland and the Prime Minister of Poland in Warsaw.  Just as you did a generation ago, the Lithuanians, Latvians, and Estonians join hands in a human chain of freedom. 
Ukrainians have shown tremendous courage to realize their aspirations for a better life and integration into the institutions of their choice -- not anyone else’s choice -- of their choice.  Russia has chosen to respond with military aggression, a referendum rejected by virtually the entire world, illegal efforts to annex Crimea, and now reports of armed attacks against Ukrainian military personnel and installations in Crimea. 
I want to make it clear:  We stand resolutely with our Baltic allies in support of the Ukrainian people and against Russian aggression.  As long as Russia continues on this dark path, they will face increasing political and economic isolation.
There are those who say that this action shows the old rules still apply, but Russia cannot escape the fact that the world is changing and rejecting outright their behavior.  Global markets and the international community will and should bet in the long run on countries that reject aggression and corruption, embrace openness and live up to their obligations.  Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania understand this well.  That doesn’t mean that there aren’t aggressors out there that require firm and resolute response.  There always have been and there always will be.  But it does mean that there are costs, and growing costs, that come with naked aggression.
Madam President, Mr. President, the reason I traveled to the Baltics was to reaffirm our mutual commitment to collective defense.  President Obama wanted me to come personally to make it clear what you already know, that under Article 5 of the NATO treaty, we will respond.  We will respond to any aggression against a NATO ally. 
As someone who fought for your nation’s admission into NATO, rest assured we take our responsibilities very, very, very seriously -- the President does; I do; my nation does.  That’s why we have in the recent past beefed up our U.S. rotation in NATO Baltic air policing program, which protects the skies above Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  And that will continue to be the case.  We’ve also asked other members of NATO to make additional contributions to this and other efforts, and I’m confident they will step forward.
Looking ahead, we’re exploring a number of additional steps to increase the pace and scope of our military cooperation, including rotating U.S. forces of the Baltic region to conduct ground and naval exercises, and training missions.  The question today is not what can America do for the Baltic nations; it is what can we do together -- what can we do together. 
The Baltic nations have shown leadership at the OSCE, the European Union, the Eastern Partnership and the U.N. Security Council.  Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian troops have stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Americans in Afghanistan and have served in difficult regional and global security missions. 
I know that President Obama will want to use the upcoming NATO summit in South Wales to generate concrete commitments to ensure that NATO is able to meet its Article 5 obligations to all members, which has been a priority from him and me since the beginning of our administration. 
And, finally, we spoke of energy.  We spoke about energy cooperation.  We have learned the hard way that protecting the sovereignty of nations depends on having more than one supplier of energy.  We support your efforts within the European Union to diversify your energy sources, to create more flexible energy markets, and to translate energy innovation into energy security so that no nation can use supplies of energy as a political weapon or a quasi-military weapon against you.
As Ukraine fights for its future, the success of the Baltic nations, your success, paints a picture of what is possible for nations that respect the rights and unleash the talents of their people as both your countries have done. 
We are in this with you together.  We are absolutely committed.  May God bless you and your people, and my God bless our troops.  Thank you very much.
END
2:07 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 18, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and President Toomas Ilves of Estonia
Warsaw Marriott Hotel
Warsaw, Poland
5:20 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Good afternoon, everyone.  Mr. President, I was pleased to have another chance to get together with you and speak with you today, and I appreciate the fact you made the time to see me in the midst of your own state visit to Poland.  I appreciate it very much.  And I look forward to seeing your fellow Baltic heads of state tomorrow in Vilnius. 
Estonia’s success is, in our view, a living testament to what’s possible -- where innovators can breathe free and people can speak their minds, where democratic rights and universal freedoms are protected, and when countries are free to choose their own path. 
The Estonian people, like many of Russia’s neighbors, have a personal stake in what’s happening in Ukraine.  Your history reminds us of how vigilant you have to remain.  And today, Mr. President, we’ve consulted on a path ahead.  We spoke about the steps we’re taking alongside many other nations to support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity; to help Ukraine stabilize its economy and conduct fair and free democratic elections; and to condemn and reject Russia’s illegal -- absolutely illegal conduct in taking steps to annex Crimea.  And also, we talked about how to impose costs on Russia for their aggression.  There’s no other word for it; it’s aggression.
And when we speak about costs, we’re talking about more than just sanctions.  We’re talking about Russia putting itself on a path that undermines long-term confidence and creates obstacles for its full participation in the global economy.  That path they’ve placed themselves on does nothing to help the next generation of Russians compete and succeed in a world that will be led by the most open, innovative and dynamic economies.
The President and I also discussed our commitments as NATO allies.  I came here today and will travel to Vilnius tomorrow to stand with our NATO allies and reconfirm and reaffirm our shared commitment to collective self-defense, to Article 5.  I want to make it absolutely clear what it means to the Estonian people and all the people of the Baltics.  President Obama and I view Article 5 of the NATO Treaty as an absolutely solemn commitment which we will honor -- we will honor.
And that’s why, in the past few weeks, we’ve had substantial -- we have substantially augmented the U.S. rotation of NATO’s Baltic air policing program and that protects the skies over Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  We’re working to line up countries to continue to augment that rotation after our turn comes to an end and we will turn the mission over to Poland.
Looking ahead, we’re exploring a number of additional steps to increase the pace and scope of our military cooperation, including rotating U.S. forces to the Baltic region to conduct ground and naval exercise, as well as training missions.  Next week will mark the 10th anniversary of the Baltic States’ membership in NATO.
A decade ago, I had the privilege as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, as a United States senator, to champion your admission.  The security partnership we built together has surpassed even the high expectations of those of us who argued on behalf of admission.  I know because, as I said, I was one of them. 
In Afghanistan, Estonian troops fought alongside Americans. We worked closely together on cybersecurity, which you’re leading.  Estonia remains one of the few NATO countries that invests, has committed, 2 percent of its gross domestic product to defense year after year.
The relationship, Mr. President, goes beyond security as well as our discussions did.  Mr. President, we admire and value Estonia’s contribution and the example you set as a successful young democracy.  Ours is a partnership based on shared values, and it’s no surprise we work together to support other young democracies like Tunisia and Moldova.  And as we discussed today, Mr. President, we’re working to create an even greater economic integration and cooperation to diversify your sources of energy.
Mr. President, for decades America kept faith with the dream of freedom and independence of the Baltic people.  Your security and your success matters a great deal to us.  Your friendship also matters, and your personal friendship as well.
So, Mr. President, thank you for making time for us.  And may God bless the people of Estonia, and may God protect our troops.
PRESIDENT TOOMAS ILVES:  Thank you, Mr. Vice President.  And thank you for illustrating what a close relationship we have with this great idea of getting together and discussing how things are going, because ultimately that’s how allies are.  We don’t have these formal meetings where you come in and prearrange, but we get together to discuss how we see things.  And I think that is what -- that is the essence of an alliance, is being able to talk with your friends and like-minded people about what needs to be done.  And today was a great example of precisely this kind of meeting, and it was -- that’s why I say thank you, because it reassured me that things are going the right way.
And of course, we did come here to discuss things that aren’t going the right way.  The Ukrainian crisis is something that causes concern for all people who believe in freedom and justice and rule of law, and also even in international law, where we see such blatant cases of aggression, of violations of international law, where, if the international community does not stand up, the international order will collapse because the kinds of behavior we’ve seen is dangerous for the world. 
And here, again, thank you for the U.S.’s leadership in the Security Council, and especially Ambassador Power’s great statements.  We really liked them in Estonia.
But when we think about where we are, it’s quite clear that we are -- the actions of the last several weeks have led us to -- are forcing us to reassess the past or the assumptions of the past 20, 25 years.  The old idea of NATO, which I remember from 20 years ago, out of the area or out of business, predicated on a Europe that no longer has any threats.  That, unfortunately, has turned out, with the actions we’ve seen against Ukraine, no longer to apply. 
The East-West relationship needs to be put on a new standing.  We and NATO must draw our conclusions from Russia’s behavior in the current crisis; we need and must conduct a review of the entire range of NATO-Russia relations.  The principles -- the well-meaning, fundamental principles of the 1997 Founding Act -- NATO-Russia Founding Act don’t apply anymore.  There is no more respect for territorial integrity, for transparency.  And if that is the case, we have to draw our own conclusions.  And that is my hope -- that at the upcoming NATO summit in Wales, we will have drawn our own conclusions and refocus on collective defense. The raison d’etre of NATO is to defend members of the Alliance and defend the territory of the members of the Alliance. And so a refocus on the original idea of NATO is what must come out of Wales.
We discussed, also, the response of Europe.  Europe has responded, but it is our belief in Estonia, and, I understand, in some other countries -- among them, the United States -- that the response must be more robust than it has been.  The response should not be about the price of gas, it must be about common values and the price of not adhering to those common values.  That is a far more serious and costly price, is giving up our values.
So tomorrow, when the Council will meet in Brussels, Estonia will be championing those values.  And it is my sincere hope that many members of the European Union will join us in standing up for the values that make Europe Europe. 
Specifically on our bilateral relations, let me say, once again, I’d like to thank you, Mr. Vice President, and the United States, for your very swift response to the crisis, and the augmentation of Baltic air policing, backing us up when we feel a need for it.  That is what NATO is about.  On our part, you can count on us to do what it takes to not only keep up our share of 2 percent, but also when it comes to helping out in Ukraine, for example, our knowhow is there to be used and we are committed to you to help.
Ultimately, I think this, once again, a serious crisis in Europe has shown that the presence of the United States in Europe -- and especially in our region, the Baltic area -- is absolutely vital.  It is what allows us to give credibility to NATO.  And we thank you for helping us in this way and giving NATO that credibility that all of Europe so desperately needs. 
END   
5:32 P.M (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 18, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden with President Bronislaw Komorowski of Poland
Presidential Palace
Warsaw, Poland
3:47 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you very much.  Let me begin where you ended.  Russia has increased their budget. But I want to remind you, you have an ally whose budget is larger than the next 10 nations in the world combined.  So while others may not have stood up to their responsibilities, the United States has more than stood up to its responsibilities.  We have a budget larger than the next 10 nations in the world combined, so don't worry about where we are.  Number one.
Number two, Mr. President, my mother used to have a saying  -- she’d say, you're defined by your courage and you are redeemed by your loyalty.  Well, I doubt there’s another nation on Earth that would better fit that description than Poland.  The Polish coat of arms, the Solidarity flag hanging here over us, the Polish constitution in this room -- it strikes me that I don't think there’s a country in the world that knows better than Poland both the bitter cost of aggression and the sweetness of liberty. 
Today, Mr. President, the people of Ukraine are reaching for that very same right and freedoms that the Poles cherish.  They want a government that serves its people and they want the right to free expression, the chance to choose Ukraine’s path and affiliations as a united nation without fear of coercion.  That's their goal, what you’ve accomplished.
They understand that the verdict of history is absolutely clear:  Societies like Poland that embrace these values -- openness, freedom, the respect for the rule of law -- they are the countries that own and will own the future.  Those that bet instead on aggression and fear-mongering are bound to fail.  And so we look to our Polish friends who made the journey of freedom within our lifetime to exercise leadership in helping Ukraine follow in your footsteps. 
Today, Mr. President, we spoke about a situation that's unfolding in Ukraine.  We agreed on the need for the United States, Poland and our European friends to stand together in supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, rejecting Russia’s absolutely illegitimate claims and steps to annex Crimea, and imposing costs on Russia and Mr. Putin for Russian aggression while making it clear there is a better path if they choose to take it, and helping the Ukrainian people and their government as they chart a new future.
As we proceed, Mr. President, I want to make it unmistakingly clear to you and to all our allies in the region that our commitment to mutual self-defense under Article 5 of NATO remains ironclad.  It is not in question.  It is ironclad.
Fifteen years ago, I was honored, as the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, to lead the fight for Poland’s admission into NATO -- in other words, to put that very commitment, that very commitment of Article 5, put that in place for Poland.  Have no doubt, the United States will honor its commitments.  We always do. 
And today, Mr. President, you and I spoke about the steps that have been taken in recent days to bolster our security presence in Europe, including deployment of 12 American F-16 fighter jets and hundreds of American servicemen to Poland.  We've also discussed new opportunities for training and exercises that we'll pursue through NATO here in Poland.  As I said earlier today, our missile defense plans continue on schedule, including our firm commitment to place an operational missile defense site here in Poland by 2018.
And for its part, Poland has launched an impressive effort to modernize its military.  It stands as an excellent example for all in NATO.  The United States looks forward to being a strong partner in your effort to modernize, Mr. President, of course.  Our partnership and our discussions extended far beyond militaries.  We also spoke extensively about our work together in the advance of trade and energy security. 
Mr. President, President Obama and I want the Polish people to know that there is a deep, deep commitment to Poland that lives in the hearts of a vast majority of Americans.  And I'm sure any Pole who has ever visited America -- the United States has felt it.  It's real.  It's deep. 
And if you’ll excuse, as we used to say when I was in the United States Senate, Mr. President, a point of personal privilege -- there‘s a Polish cavalryman’s sword presented to me by your predecessor, by your government, that hangs proudly in my family home.  It's a small token of the value many Americans place on our countries’ friendship, and a value I place on your country’s friendship and yours.
May God bless Poland, and may God protect our troops.  We are together.
END   
3:53 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 18, 2014
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden with Prime Minister Donald Tusk of Poland
Prime Minister’s Chancellery
Warsaw, Poland
1:56 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Prime Minister, these are challenging times. And I've known you for a while and the President and I have great respect for you, and we're absolutely confident that we are up to the challenge.  It’s more important today than ever that friends stand with one another and be unequivocal about it.  That's why I'm here in Poland, as a steadfast ally, an ally as -- a country -- as strong an ally as a country can wish to have, and you are among the best allies America has, Mr. Prime Minister.
Ukraine -- it's an almost unbelievable set of events that has brought us here.  The President asked me to come to Warsaw today to reaffirm the United States’ solemn commitment, solemn NATO commitment, and to consult with Poland’s leaders about the situation in Ukraine. 
The people of Ukraine have shown tremendous courage and they’ve worked very hard to realize their aspirations for a more democratic future, free of oligarchy and corruption; for a Ukraine connected to institutions and markets of Europe, but respectful of Ukraine’s deep cultural and economic ties to its neighbors. 
Unfortunately, Russia’s leaders have responded with a brazen -- brazen military incursion, with a purposeful ratcheting up of ethnic tensions inside Ukraine, with a rushed and illegal referendum in Crimea that was, not surprisingly, rejected by virtually the entire world, and now, today, with steps to annex Crimea. 
We join Poland and the international community condemning the continuing assault on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the blatant -- the blatant violation of international law by Mr. Putin and Russia.
Russia has offered a variety of arguments to justify what is nothing more than a land grab, including what was said today.  But the world has seen through -- has seen through Russia’s action and has rejected the logic -- the flawed logic behind those actions.  Countries like Poland have shown that real progress comes from open societies who, in fact, have open markets, not from invasion and aggression. 
Thirteen of the 15 countries on the Security Council of the United Nations voted to condemn the referendum in Crimea as illegitimate.  Even China decided it could not support it and abstained, and Russia -- Russia stood alone, naked in front of the world, for the aggression that they had undertaken.  It's a simple fact that Russia’s political and economic isolation will only increase if it continues down its current path and it will, in fact, see additional -- additional sanctions by the United States and the EU.
As the Prime Minister and I discussed in a fairly long meeting we had this morning, as we impose costs on Russia for violating international law we have to be equally resolute in supporting the regime -- supporting the government in Ukraine right now.  The United States is working to provide a billion-dollar loan guarantee, technical assistance to prepare for free and fair elections, and support for reforms that will allow the IMF to provide a stronger stabilization package for Ukraine.
The Prime Minister and I discussed how the United States and Europe can carry forward its support for Ukraine and the Ukrainian people in the face of their immediate needs.  The Prime Minister and I reviewed our mutual commitments as NATO allies.  The United States and Poland stand shoulder-to-shoulder in vital missions around the world.  But recent events remind us that the bedrock of our alliance remains collective self-defense, as enshrined in Article 5 of the NATO Treaty.  Our intent is that NATO emerge from this crisis stronger and more unified than ever.
If you want to know what we think, President Obama and I view Article 5 as a solemn commitment not only for our time, but for all time.  We take it deadly serious, and our commitment is absolutely unwavering and unshakeable.  That's why the United States has just deployed 12 F-16 fighter jets to the Lask Airbase in Poland.  We've augmented the U.S. rotation of NATO’s Baltic air policing program protecting the skies over Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuanian, where I'll be traveling tomorrow.  Instead of four F-15s we have sent 10. 
Today, the combatant commander for Europe is convening a meeting in Croatia with the chiefs of defense of Central and Eastern European countries to discuss the current situation, which Poland will be attending, and we'll pursue additional steps that will strengthen our alliance for the future.
At NATO, we'll encourage allies to update contingency planning and threat assessments.  Working with our Polish friends, we want to recognize our Polish aviation detachment to offer opportunities for other allies to work with combined training and expand our training to include U.S. Army planners as well as taking further steps.
It goes without saying that collective defense is a shared responsibility, and the United States of America strongly supports Poland’s military modernization and we look forward to being a partner in that modernization.  We appreciate Poland’s commitment to carry its share of the financial burden, as all ally NATO should do. 
For our part, U.S. plans for a European phased adaptive  approach to ballistic missile defense, which we announced almost five years ago -- those plans are on schedule.  We've met our target so far and we will -- we will, in fact, bring it to fruition.  That is our firm commitment, an operational missile defense site here in Poland by 2018. 
Mr. Prime Minister, we also spoke about energy.  In the coming weeks, we'll be meeting with our European partners to discuss ways to further diversify their source and supplies of energy.  This will help improve energy security and it will ensure that no nation can use the supply of gas as a political weapon against any other nation.  Today, the Prime Minister and I spoke about steps Poland is taking to reverse natural gas flows into some pipelines to help the Ukrainians access additional supplies of gas if needed.
Finally, we talked about a negotiations toward the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the United States and Europe.  This is already, that trade, is already the largest commercial relationship in the world.  But we have an additional chance to significantly expand together, creating jobs on both sides of the Atlantic.
So, Mr. Prime Minister, we are profoundly grateful for your friendship and the friendship of the people of Poland.  It is said that Joshua’s trumpet brought down the walls of Jericho.  But I watched personally that it was Poland’s courage that unleashed the forces that brought down the Berlin Wall.  You set a standard, Mr. Prime Minister, and your country set a standard for what a country can achieve when it has the courage to reach for its freedom.  And we look forward to continue to work very closely together in the days ahead, Mr. Prime Minister.
May God bless Poland, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you very much for all you’ve done.
END   
2:06 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 March 14, 2014
Remarks by President Obama, Vice President Biden, and Prime Minister Kenny of Ireland at St. Patrick's Day Reception
East Room
5:12 P.M. EDT
 
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hey, everyone, how are you?  Welcome to the White House.  (Applause.)  And happy St. Patrick’s Day Week. 
 
In 1963, President Kennedy addressed the Irish Parliament and he said, and I quote, “Our two nations, divided by distance, have been united by history.”  And that is obvious to every one of you in this room today.  And nothing exemplifies that bond more than this building.  It was designed by an Irishman named James Hoban -- Hoban.  Any Hobans in the room?  (Laughter.)  I lived across the street from a guy named Johnny Hoban -- anyway, it’s a long story.  (Laughter.)  And it’s been occupied by 19 Presidents of Irish descent -- (applause) -- and the remaining were despondent they could not make that claim.
 
So it’s wonderful to be here today in the White House with all of you.  And I’m reminded of a New Yorker article that Pat Moynihan, God bless him, put on my desk on a St. Patrick’s Day back in the early ’90s.  There was a New Yorker article that had Pat and Mike sitting in a pub in New York, and Pat looks at Mike and says, “Mike, don’t you wish you were in Dublin in a pub wishing you were in New York?”  (Laughter.)  At least the Irish Catholic family I came from, that’s kind of it.  (Applause.)  As I said today, we Irish are the only people I know who are nostalgic about the future.  (Laughter.)  Think about that; you’ll know it’s true.
 
So my mom, who passed away a couple of years ago, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden -- used to say -- and I mean this sincerely -- her notion was, she said, Joey, to be Irish is about family, it’s about faith, but most of all, it’s about courage, for without courage, you cannot love with abandon.  And I think that’s one of the defining elements of -- that’s the Irish of it, that passion that built both our nations and continues to run through the bloodstream of all Irish Americans. 
 
The history of the journey of this great country, in my view, has always been about promise -- the promise that anything is possible.  It’s about possibilities.  And Barack and I -- the President and I occasionally talk about that.  We’re both here in the White House, coming from where we came from -- the idea that would happen in any other country is unlikely.
 
You know, no one embodies the possibilities and promise of our two nations like the leaders you’re about to hear from.  There’s an old Irish expression:  A good friend is like a four-leaf clover -- hard to find and lucky to have.  Ladies and gentlemen, let me introduce to you four of my good friends -- and I mean that seriously -- the President of the United States and Michelle Obama, and the Taoiseach and Fionnuala Kenny.  (Applause.)
 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Hello, everybody.  (Applause.)  We'll, welcome to the White House.  (Applause.)  Once again, today is not technically St. Patrick’s Day.  (Laughter.)  And once again, none of you seem particularly bothered by this.  (Laughter.)  At least you’ll have a weekend to recover.  (Laughter.)
 
I want to start by welcoming Taoiseach Kenny and his lovely wife, Fionnuala, who are not just joining us here today, but more importantly, bringing their children.  And we won’t embarrass them by pointing them out.  (Laughter.)  But we’re thrilled to have them here.  I’m especially grateful that they’re here at a time when the rest of Ireland is focused on the final round of the Six Nations Rugby Tournament.  (Applause.)  And the last match of the legendary Brian O’Driscoll.  (Applause.)  I know everyone wants to talk to the Kennys tonight, but let me make sure they have plenty of voice left to cheer on Ireland tomorrow.
 
Finally, I want to extend a special welcome to Anne Anderson, the newest Ambassador of Ireland to the United States.  (Applause.)  Anne is the first woman to hold this esteemed position -- (applause) -- which means that they might finally get it right.  (Laughter.)  
 
One of Ireland’s greatest poets, Patrick Kavanagh, once wrote, “When I wandered over my own hills and talked again to my own people, I looked into the heart of this life and saw that it was good.”  That’s what St. Patrick’s Day is all about.  It’s about remembering the hills from where so many of us came and the people without whom so many of us would not be here today.  And it is about recognizing how much we owe to the Irish men and women who, to borrow a line from James Joyce, lived and laughed and loved and left.
It’s also about appreciating how much of our American character has Irish roots.  When the first large wave of Irish immigrants set sail for the New World, many of them were already tired, hungry and desperately poor.  And life wasn’t always easier in America.  Many jobs were closed to Irish immigrants -- with signs announcing “No Irish Need Apply” -- and many of the ones that were available involved long and dirty and thankless tasks that made life difficult and often too short.  
 
But the Irish worked hard.  And they persevered.  And they supported each other in tight-knit communities, united by faith, where doors were always open and hands were always extended in hard times.  Or, to adapt a quote from the author Finley Peter Dunne, there wasn’t one struggling family in this world that wasn’t carrying three others on its back.  And together, they were driven by that most American of ideas -- that with enough effort, anybody can build a decent life for their families and leave a better life for their children. 
 
And eventually, that’s exactly what happened.  In Newburyport, Massachusetts in the early 20th century, two-thirds of Irish-Americans were members of the working class, just one third in the middle class.  But if you looked at the third generation alone -- the grandchildren of Irish immigrants -- the numbers were reversed.  A majority had broken into the middle class.
 
So the American Dream has always been the Irish-American Dream.  And that’s why so many of you have been working with us to fix our broken immigration system.  Under today’s laws, many of your parents and grandparents may not have made it here.  And too many men and women who want to contribute to our economy are being denied that chance.  There’s no reason why we can’t do for this generation of immigrants what was done for a previous generation, to give them that chance.  (Applause.)
 
Because like millions of immigrants, the sons and daughters of Erin have always lived by the words of the great Seamus Heaney, who passed away last year: “Believe that further shore is reachable from here.  Believe in miracles.” 
 
And before the G8 summit last June, Michelle and I got a chance to visit Belfast.  We saw firsthand the tremendous progress that’s been made in Northern Ireland since the Good Friday Agreement was signed 16 years ago, as well as the long road that still lies ahead. 
 
And before my speech at the Waterfront, Michelle was introduced by a 16-year-old girl named Hannah Nelson.  (Applause.)  And Hannah is here -- there she is, right there. Hey, Hannah.  Hannah is a member of the first generation of Northern Irish to grow up knowing the possibilities of peace.  (Applause.)  And in her introduction she said, “Often in Northern Ireland we hear about our past…But truthfully, we should not let the past pull us apart and stop us moving forward…We need to listen to each other and we need to compromise.  Most importantly, we need to clearly value each other.” 
 
And so if Hannah and that generation reflects such wisdom, I think their elders, all of us, need to pay attention, follow their advice.  Young people like Hannah give us hope for the future because they’re driven by the same optimism, the same belief in miracles that drove their ancestors.  But they also benefit from something that didn’t exist for members of the previous generation -- and that’s a hard-won peace that is theirs to nurture and advance.  They have an example of what’s possible.
 
So, to the people of Ireland and Northern Ireland, I’ll close by paraphrasing Seamus Heaney again.  The Ireland you now inhabit is one that your contemporaries have helped imagine.  But the Ireland that you will inhabit is one your children are helping to build -- one that’s more just, and more peaceful, and more tolerant, and more fair.
 
And with that, I want to propose a toast.  And I’m going to -- this is the best that I can do -- water.  (Laughter.)  Clearly, they had the wrong day.  (Laughter.)  May our children continue to enjoy the bonds we share tonight -- of family, faith, friendship, and hope for the future.  “So fill to me the parting glass; Good night and joy be with you all.”
 
And now it is my pleasure to introduce my good friend, Taoiseach Kenny.  (Applause.)
 
PRIME MINISTER KENNY: (Speaks in Gaelic.)  Welcome, everybody, here to the White House.  Mr. President and First Lady Michelle, Mr. Vice President, Dr. Biden, ladies and gentlemen:  Fionnuala and I are delighted to be with you here at the White House to celebrate the Feast of St. Patrick.  Thank you for your warm hospitality in honor of Ireland and of the Irish people. 
 
Thank you for the toast, Mr. President.  I didn’t think that austerity was biting that far into the White House.  (Laughter and applause.)
 
As we make strides in our own economic recovery, it is wonderful to know that our country still occupies such a special place in the heart and the mind of the United States of America. 
 
Mr. President, in June last year, we met at the G8 summit in Fermanagh.  Next day, Dublin came out with a warm summer welcome for Michelle and Malia and Sasha.  And tonight, sir, I just want to make something very clear:  I have heard what I regard the insider speculation surrounding your attributed desire to keep your Vice President off our island has been wholly without foundation.  (Laughter.)  And at the same time, summoning the persuasive spirit of St. Patrick, I did put in a word for Joe this morning -- (laughter.)  His work is invaluable.  His listening ear is critical.  Thank you, Mr. President, for authorizing him to travel to Ireland.  (Applause.)  We have a golf date. 
 
So I look forward to welcoming him home with Jill to the land of our forebears, to the land of his people and of our people, together, as we say, Oileán ár sinsear -- the island of our ancestors -- where five million of us live, and 70 million call home.  And home and our sense of it is what makes us who we are as Irish people.
 
Just as the Forbes Magazine recently was declaring Ireland to be the best country in the world for business, out there in the Atlantic east of here, storms Hercules and Darwin were making a declaration of their own, through the awesome power of nature, gifting us remnants of Neolithic settlements, ghosts of drowned oak forests, 7,000-years-old remnants uncovered on our beaches and land near sea.
 
So, Mr. President, these are excavations not just of our history, but of life on our island, the geology of our heart.  And they signal our tradition and our capacity to endure and to adapt, to survive and to thrive; to know fear, to know loss, and yet to conscript new generations to courage and vision and a brilliant future across the millenia. 
 
That’s why, today, we have the most adaptable workforce in the world and the youngest workforce in the European Union.  That’s why in no other country in the world do U.S. multinationals and U.S. emerging companies have as big a presence as they have in our country. 
 
And according to the received wisdom of it’s not being enough to do well but to do good, so I’m proud to say that despite our difficulties, we are the most generous people in Europe in our giving to those in need, and every day since the United Nations was founded, the Irish are somewhere on the globe involved in peacekeeping or humanitarian duties.  And as we are, Mr. President, we are ever mindful of the kindness that America, in turn, has shown to us and to our people.
 
This evening, as we celebrate St. Patrick, who was himself an immigrant, Mr. President, I am heartened by your words, and I thank you for all you are doing and others in this great country are doing to help our men and women living here undocumented.  We know America will sort this out.  (Applause.) 
 
I’m thrilled you mentioned young Hannah.  I saw her deliver her words last year on television -- congratulations.  And from you to Mark Pollack, whom I see here in front of me, without sight, without the capability of walking, yet he has done extraordinary things in a sense of his vision and his courage of what we can do with our shared humanity.  (Applause.)
 
So, sir, as we take our leave here this evening, we do remember absent friends whom you’ve mentioned -- in particular, he who documented the dream -- the farmer’s son, the known blood relative of the gods, Seamus Heaney.  And in his memory, and in honor of St. Patrick, let us do as he asks when he said, go beyond what’s reliable and recollect how bold you were when I visited you first, with departures you cannot go back on.
 
So, Mr. President, First Lady, Ireland has made its departure.  There is no going back.  Tonight, then, let our two nations, our two countries, Ireland and the United States, heed and live the last words of Seamus Heaney texted to his wife before he left, “Noli timere,” “Do not be afraid.” 
 
Thank you.  (Applause.) 
 
END
5:29 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 10, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at a Bilateral Meeting with Chilean President Sebastián Piñera
Palacio de la Moneda
Santiago, Chile
PRESIDENT PIÑERA:  Good morning.  I would like to give the most warm in the world’s welcome to the Vice President of the United States, Mr. Joe Biden.
You know that he was elected senator when he was only 29 years of age (inaudible) the youngest senator in the history of the United States.  He performed as a U.S. senator for more than 36 years, and now he’s the Vice President of the United States. 
Welcome to Chile. 
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.
PRESIDENT PIÑERA:  We consider yourself and the country a very good and loyal friend of my country.  So -- and I know that you have a very important voice to give and we are very pleased to have you here.  Welcome to Chile once again, and I give you --
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Well, thank you, Mr. President.  I -- despite some of the crises that are going on around the world, the President and I agreed that it was important that I be here in Chile because this -- our commitment to this relationship is real.  It’s deep, and you’ve deepened in your term, Mr. President. 
I had a great meeting with President-elect Bachelet this morning, and I’m looking forward to meeting with you after this brief comments to the press here.  And I also look forward to meeting the other leaders in the region from Colombia, Peru, Mexico and elsewhere.  So it’s an opportunity for me meet others as well.
The President and I believe that the hemisphere, the Western Hemisphere, and particularly the Southern Hemisphere has -- offers enormous, enormous potential.  It’s the destination of 40 percent of all of America’s exports.  It’s home to a growing middle class, and it’s quickly becoming (inaudible) quickly becoming a world energy center. 
And we, for the first time, Mr. President, at least in my career, talk about how to achieve a hemisphere that is secure, middle-class and free.  We’ve never been able to look at it that way before.  From Canada through -- down through Chile and everywhere in between, And nowhere in the region is that more -- potentially more apparent than in Chile.  (Inaudible) the United States you mentioned historic close ties.  And that's why -- it’s why I’m here.  That's why my delegation is here.
Mr. President, our two countries have worked well together.  We’ve made significant progress through your leadership in the TPP, Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiation.  During your term, Mr. President, our two countries also strengthened our people-to-people ties through the Visa Waiver Program.  I remember first meeting you, talking about that.  Chile is the only Latin America country in the program that allows visa-free travel between Chile and the United States. 
And as far as my visit, I’m happy to say that we’re not going to wait until May the 1st.  We want to move that program up to begin on March the 31st.  Again, thank you for your -- all your efforts.
The United States, Mr. President, looks forward to working with your successor, President Bachelet, on these and many more issues.  I personally look forward to tomorrow’s  .  I’ve heard it described as the perfect example of democratic transfer of power.  Chile’s economic, democratic tradition teaches us all that pragmatism, not ideology, is the secret to success.  It’s no coincidence that Chile has used democracy and the open market to create new opportunities for her citizens.  And we continue to look forward to working with the government of Chile, and I continue to look forward to seeing you as well in person. 
Thank you for you hospitality.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 13, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at a Bilateral Meeting with Israeli President Shimon Peres
President’s Residence
Jerusalem
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you, Mr. President.  As I was telling the Prime Minister and the Speaker today, I consider you among one of the fewer than a handful of men in the world who possess not just great experience but genuine wisdom.  And you know and I say to your friends in the press here that I’ve always sought it.  I’ve sought it over the past 40 years, and I mean that sincerely.
Mr. Sullivan and I, my national security adviser, on the way back from the Sharon ranch, were talking about -- he raised the point that you may be the most eloquent and articulate man he’s ever heard.  And I’ve pointed out that not only are you eloquent and articulate but you possess great wisdom.
President Obama wanted me to be here today not merely -- primarily to pay our respects to a great war hero, but a man whose life seemed to, from my perspective at least, mirror the changes that occurred in Israel since its inception as a nation.  At the very outset, the overwhelming necessity was literally to keep from being pushed into the sea by hostile neighbors that were more powerful and had larger armies and more weapons.  And he led the fight and changed the circumstance where Israel is no longer in physical jeopardy as a consequence of being overwhelmed; Israel is a significant power in its own right. 
But as that changed, it seemed to me as though former Prime Minister Sharon not changed but changed his focus.  And I said today that one of the last utterances he made, major statements, was he wanted to work on peace.  God only knows what would have happened if the last eight years had been one where he was still in that vineyard working for peace.  I think it reflects a change in the region, the need to -- the understanding that Israel’s ultimate security rests in a genuine accommodation with the Palestinians that it is born out of secure borders that are peaceful. 
And I was saying earlier, Mr. President, that the Arab Spring is an incredibly historical phenomenon, but I think our grandchildren and great-grandchildren are going to look back on it and say, why did they think they could manage it?  It has a life of its own, and we can only hope to be wise enough to help steer it in the right direction.
But the one place where there’s a possibility for an island of stability, quite frankly, is what you said, and that is between the Palestinian people and the Israeli people in two secure states respecting one another’s sovereignty and security.  And the President believes and I believe that this is one of those opportunities, one of those moments in history where it has to be seized.   
As you know, my friend -- and he is my close, close friend for a long time -- John Kerry, is passionate about creating and trying to help accommodate that outcome.  And there are difficult decisions.  There are going to be very difficult decisions.  And I, like you, believe that the Prime Minister is up to it.  It’s not easy.  None of this is easy. 
And let me say one last thing, Mr. President.  I said to you privately, as we were waiting for the actual burial, that it is truly remarkable that, from my perspective, God blessed this great country at its inception with such a group of exceptional men and women, exceptional leaders.  It seems as though if you look at your generation of leaders from Ben Gurion to many who I’ve gotten to know, I knew, from Golda Meir to Rabin to all of the men and women who were -- as they say, to steal a phrase from a book written in the United States -- “present at the creation” -- 
PRESIDENT PERES:  -- by Dean Acheson.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Yes, exactly right.  And it was -- and so part of it was to -- even though all of you had different political points of view, you are all absolutely convicted about the necessity for there to be a nation state of Israel as the ultimate security for Jews around the world.  And I still believe that to be the case.
And I think, and I’m convinced that all your life’s work has been leading to this moment.  And God willing, it will be able to be seized.  God willing, Abu Mazen will be up to the task because he’s got to make some difficult decisions.
So I’m looking forward to having a chance when we sit alone to plumb your -- the depths of your knowledge about how you see things actually unfolding in a detailed basis.  But let me conclude by saying -- and I’ve said this many, many times -- that it’s an honor to be with you.  And you’re one of those men who every time I meet with I learn something.  And I appreciate that.  And so I’m anxious for us to be able to now have -–
Thank you.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 13, 2014
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the State Funeral of Former Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
The Knesset, Jerusalem
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  When a close-knit country like Israel, a country that has been tested as much as Israel, loses a man like Prime Minister Sharon, it doesn’t just feel like the loss of a leader, it feels like a death in the family.  And many of my fellow Americans, some of whom are here, feel that same sense of loss. 
I say to Prime Minister Sharon’s beloved and devoted sons, Omri and Gilad, and the entire family, particularly the sons who spent so much time caring for their father in the last few years, it’s a great honor you’ve afforded me on behalf of my country to bring the sympathies of the President of the United States and the American people on this occasion. 
To you, to Prime Minister Netanyahu and the government of Israel, to President Peres, and to the grieving men and women of the nation of Israel, but most particularly to his beloved IDF, his fellow warriors, I fear an attempt to capture him and what he stood for is beyond my capabilities. I knew him for over 30 years.  He was not only a powerful man, he was a powerfully built man.  And as a young senator, when you first met him you could not help but understand, as they say in the military, this man had a command presence.  He filled the room.
The first time I was invited to his office, he said to me -- and I remember thinking, is he serious? -- he said, Senator, you are mostly welcome.  I didn’t know if it was a matter of something being lost in translation or whether he was pulling my leg, as we say in the States, until I spent a few moments with him and realized how incredible his hospitality was.  But when the topic of Israel’s security arose, which it always, always, always did in my many meetings over the years with him, you immediately understood how he acquired, as the speakers referenced, the nickname “Bulldozer.”  He was indomitable. 
Like all historic leaders, Prime Minister Sharon was a complex man about whom, as you’ve already heard from his colleagues, who engendered strong opinions from everyone.  But like all historic leaders, all real leaders, he had a North Star that guided him -- a North Star from which he never, in my observation, never deviated.  His North Star was the survival of the State of Israel and the Jewish people, wherever they resided.
In talking about his spiritual attachment to the land of Israel back in an interview in the late ‘90s, he said, and I quote, “Before and above all else, I am a Jew.  My thinking is dominated by the Jews’ future in 30 years, in 300 years, in a thousand years.  That’s what preoccupies and interests me first and foremost.”  And because he possessed such incredible physical courage -- and I would add political courage -- he never, never, never deviated from that preoccupation and interest, as he referred to it.  It was his life’s work that even someone on the shores hundreds of -- thousands of miles from here could see, could smell, could taste, could feel, and when you were in his presence there was never, never any doubt about it.
The physical courage he had to lead men straight into enemy lines and deep behind them.  I remember, as a young senator, that iconic picture of him with that bandage around his head, standing there after a decisive victory, which seemed to symbolize, as Bibi -- as the Prime Minister said, an Israel that had reclaimed its roots of standing up and fighting, needing no help, standing on its own.  The political courage it took, whether you agreed with him or not, when he told 10,000 Israelis to leave their homes in Gaza in order, from his perspective, to strengthen Israel.  I can’t think of much more controversial; as a student of the Jewish state, I can’t think of a much more difficult and controversial decision that’s been made.  But he believed it and he did it.
The security of his people was always Arik’s unwavering mission, an unbreakable commitment to the future of Jews, whether 30 years or 300 years from now.  We have an expression in the States:  never in doubt.  Arik was never uncertain from my observation.  I don’t know him nearly as well as the Israeli people and his colleagues, but he seemed never in doubt.  But there were times when he acted, and those actions earned him controversy and even condemnation.  And in certain instances, American leaders -- American Presidents -- had profound differences with him, and they were never shy about stating them nor was he ever shy about stating his position.  As I said, from my observation he was a complex man, but to understand him better I think it’s important history will judge he also lived in complex times, in a very complex neighborhood.
Since he passed away, in the days ahead, there will be much written about the Prime Minister.  And it’s right for the Israeli people to reflect on all aspects of his life -- the triumphs as well as the mistakes, taking full measure of the man, the arc of his life.  For I would argue the arc of his life traced the journey of the State of Israel. 
And through it all, the United States whether we agreed or disagreed with a specific policy has been unflagging in its commitment to the State of Israel.  We have never stepped away.  We have never diminished our support.  We have never failed to make Israel’s case around the world.  We have never failed to defend Israel’s legitimacy. 
And no one in any corner of this world has any doubt about where America stands with regard to Israeli security, the independent State of Israel that is the ultimate refuge for Jews wherever they are in the world.  And that will never change.
As President Obama said when he was here in Jerusalem last year, and I quote, “Those who adhere to the ideology of rejecting Israel’s right to exist, they might as well reject the earth beneath them and the sky above because Israel is not going anywhere.  So long as there is a United States of America, you are not alone.”
For his part, Arik Sharon greatly valued that close friendship between the United States and Israel, and particularly during his years as prime minister, he worked hard to deepen our relationship.
I find it fascinating, maybe it’s I’m getting older -- I find it fascinating how some look at Israel today and say its success was inevitable.  Why didn't everyone understand this was just inevitable?  But at the outset it was anything but inevitable.  It was the opposite of inevitable.  Israel’s very survival was against all odds.  But thankfully Israel was blessed with a founding generation that understood exactly what it took to overcome those odds.  So many of that generation, because of the people of the United States, I have the great honor of personally meeting and getting to know.  I did not know David Ben Gurion, but I knew all but one -- every Prime Minister since that time. 
President Peres, you and Prime Minister Sharon are part of one of the most remarkable founding generations in the history not of this nation, but of any nation.  Historians will look back and say, but for -- but for -- the rare and unique men and women at that moment, but for that it’s hard to see how we’d be standing here on this day -- leaders like David Ben Gurion, Golda Meir, Menachem Begin, Yitzhak Rabin, the list goes on, and you, Mr. President, you all had one thing in common from an outside observer’s perspective, despite your political differences, it was that you knew in your bones, as one Israeli Prime Minister told me over 35 years ago when I was opining of the difficulty Israel faced surrounded by hostile neighbors at the time, looked at me and said, Senator, don't worry.  We Jews have a secret weapon in our struggle in the region.  We have nowhere else to go.
That realization, it seems to me, is what energized your entire generation of leadership.  I believe that's one of the reasons by Arik Sharon and so many others fought so hard their whole lives. 
Prime Minister Sharon was not only loved by the Jewish people, he not only loved them -- the Jewish people -- but he loved the land of Israel.  Not just the idea of it, but the actual land itself.  Born on a farm, about to be buried on a farm, a ranch, I remember one of the meetings I had with him.  It was a somewhat heated, and he had his maps.  And he spread them out in his office again.  And I somewhat irreverently said, Mr. Prime Minister -- I said, do you want me to do it, or are you going to do it?  Because I had heard his presentation many times.  And in the midst of it, he looked at me, and he said, let me tell you about the new calf that I just got on my ranch.  And he started talking about a calf.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Book of Genesis says, “Arise and walk the length and breadth of the land.”  Arik Sharon did just that.  He tilled it as a farmer.  He fought for it as a soldier.  He knew every hilltop and valley -- every inch of the land.  As I said, he loved his maps.  He used to come to the meetings with maps of the land rolled up under each arm.  They were always maps.
I’m reminded -- my mother’s blessed memory, I’m reminded of -- if you’ll forgive me -- an Irish poet, an Irish writer.  I’m sure Prime Minister Blair will forgive me.  That Irish writer was James Joyce.  And he said, “When I die, Dublin will be written on my heart.”  I am absolutely sure the land of Israel, the Negev is etched in Arik Sharon’s soul as it was written on Joyce’s heart.
     And the defining attributes of this great man’s character -- passion for the Jewish people, physical and political courage, and love of this land -- they have all played out on the canvas of the State of Israel’s historic trajectory. 
Arik Sharon’s journey and the journey of the State of Israel are inseparable.  They are woven together, in war, in politics, in diplomacy. 
Toward the end of his life, he said, I've been everywhere.  I've met kings, queens, presidents.  “I've been around the world. I have one thing that I would like to do:  to try to reach peace.”  
We’ll never know what the ultimate arc of Arik Sharon’s life would have been had he been physically able to pursue his stated goal.  That will be for historians to speculate and debate.  But we do know this:  As prime minister, he surprised many.  I’ve been told that, in reflecting on the difference between how he viewed things as a general and as prime minister, he would paraphrase an Israeli song lyric that said, things you see from here, look different from over there.  What would have -- what would they have looked like had he lived in good health and led those eight years?
He left us too soon, but the work of trying to reach peace continues.  And to quote Shakespeare:  He was a man, take him all in all, we shall not look upon his like again. 
May the bond between Israel and the United States never, ever be broken. 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 06, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Republic of Korea Prime Minister Chung Hongwon in a Bilateral Meeting
Prime Minister’s Office
Seoul, Republic of Korea
  4:07 P.M. (Local)
  PRIME MINISTER CHUNG:  (As interpreted) Mr. Vice President, on behalf of all of the Korean people, I would like to welcome you to Korea.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, on behalf of President Obama, thank you for welcoming me.  (Laughter.)
  PRIME MINISTER CHUNG:  This year marks the 60th anniversary of the Korea-U.S. alliance.  And as you come to Korea as we end this year, I believe that we will be able to further solidify our alliance.  And it also shows that we have a very bright future ahead.
  I know that you worked in the legal -- you had a legal career.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Yes, very briefly.  (Applause.)
  PRIME MINISTER CHUNG:  And your wife was a teacher, and your son was an attorney general.  I myself used to be a teacher before I became an attorney general.  And that is why I believe we have a very close affinity.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I believe that as well.
  PRIME MINISTER CHUNG:  I look forward to a very pleasant conversation with you, and I look forward to a very constructive meeting today.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, I look forward to it as well.  And as I wrote in your book, 60 years of incredible friendship and progress produced the Miracle on the Han.  I think that the next 60 years will produce the Miracle in the Pacific Basin.
  This is an alliance born out of blood, sweat and tears of our warriors -- yours and ours.  And now the incredible friendship of the Korean and American people, it’s (inaudible).
  I’m even more convinced about it after addressing 1,600 students at the university and seeing those bright eyes and eager faces and keen intellects.  And I’m confident about the future of our relationship.
  Although I haven’t practiced law in many years, I did teach at an American law school for 20 years.  And I’ve come to realize that teaching is more difficult.  My wife, Dr. Biden, is the first person in American history to occupy the office of Second Lady and continue to teach full time.  She teaches 15 credits a semester at the university as I speak.  She often reminds me I have one full-time job, she has two.  (Laughter.)
  But I’m looking forward to the conversation.
  PRIME MINISTER CHUNG:  I know that you delivered a very insightful speech in Yonsai University.  The past 60 years of our alliance was built by us, the previous generation.  But the next 60 years will depend on the younger generation, and I believe it is very meaningful that you are able to deliver a very heart-touching speech.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, I’m optimistic.  I really am.  It’s not a political contrivance.  I am truly optimistic about the possibilities that we have.
  The world we all operate in today is fundamentally different than it was even 10 years.  And that's not hyperbole.  It is fundamentally different.  Times of change present great challenges, but it’s the only time of great opportunity.
  END
  4:14 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 06, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Republic of Korea President Park Geun-Hye in a Bilateral Meeting
Blue House
Seoul, Republic of Korea
11:45 A.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT PARK:  (As interpreted) Mr. Vice President, I sincerely welcome you to Korea.
And indeed, your visit to Korea marks the first of its kind in 10 years by a U.S. Vice President, and I believe that this visit to Korea adds further significance to the 60th anniversary of our alliance partnership that we mark this year.
At a time when we have recently been seeing growing volatility and tensions in Northeast Asia, one can say that it’s very helpful for certain -- in Northeast Asia to have a Vice President with such profound insights in foreign affairs travel to this region.
As we mark the 60th anniversary of our alliance partnership and look back over the last 60 years, we can -- say that the Korea-U.S. alliance has been serving as the lynchpin for stability and prosperity not only on the Korean Peninsula but also in Northeast Asia, and we hope to further build on the trust that we have built over the last six decades to further deepen our relationship and to take it forward, and may your visit, Mr. Vice President, offer a precious stepping stone in that direction.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Madam President, and your entire delegation, thank you.  It’s an honor for my colleagues and I to be able to be here with you today.
As I said to your colleagues, Madam President, in the other room, your visit to Washington had a profound effect upon the members of the United States Congress and the American people because you communicate with such sincerity the warmth and the affection you feel and your people feel for the United States.
As your ambassador to the United States knows, that same feeling exists in the United States toward Korea -- the Republic of Korea.
You were very gracious suggesting I have a profound insight for foreign policy.  It was vastly exaggerated.  But what is not exaggerated is my profound respect for the people of the Republic of Korea, my profound respect for what you have accomplished in the last 60 years.
In an incredibly well received speech you made to the joint session of the United States Congress, you talked about the last 60 years and the journey that we are on together the next 60 years; a journey not only on the peninsula, not only in Northeast Asia, but in the region and the world.
That's why I’m here, to talk about that journey.  We have much to talk about, and we have much to plan.  I want to make one thing absolutely clear.  President Obama’s decision to rebalance the Pacific Basin is not in question.  The United States never says anything it does not do.  Let me say that again.  The United States never says anything it does not do.
As I said in my visits thus far in the region, it has never been a good bet to bet against America.  It has never been a good bet to bet against America.  And America is going to continue to place its bet on South Korea.
Again, thank you for your warm welcome.  And I look forward to our discussions.
END  
12:02 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 06, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on U.S.-Korea Relations and the Asia-Pacific
Yonsei University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
2:46 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)  Thank you very much, Mr. President, for that generous introduction.  And what a great honor it is to be here at such a fine university.  
I was telling the president and the provost as I met them in the back when I walked in that, as a tradition in American universities, and I'm sure it's the same here, is students only have to wait 10 minutes for an associate professor.  They can leave class after that and not be marked absent.  (Laughter.)  And 20 minutes for a full professor.  The only full professor in my family is my wife, Dr. Biden, who is a university professor.  So I can't tell you how much I'm going to brag at home about the fact that this many students waited more than 20 minutes to hear me speak.  (Applause.)  I thank you very, very much, and I apologize for being late.
In the States, when I'm late I always turn and say, it's the President's fault.  (Laughter.)  Well, I can actually say it's my fault for spending so much time with your President, and that's the reason I ran over.  So I do apologize.  Thank you for waiting.
Before I begin I'd like to take a moment to remember a man who I had the great privilege of knowing, spending some time with over the years, who changed the world and the way we see it -- Nelson Mandela.  
Nelson Mandela said, a good head and a good heart are always a formidable combination.  A good head and a good heart are a formidable combination.  In Mandela's case, he lifted a nation to freedom.  He had wisdom, compassion, and courage.  And maybe the hardest thing to possess -- forgiveness.  
I remember when I met him first -- he came to my office.  I tried to visit him when he was in prison.  I went to South Africa with a group of members of Congress to make a point that we wanted to visit him.  We were stopped, as you might not be surprised.  When he was released, he came to my office to see me -- I was what we call the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.  It was a great honor.  And during our conversation I said to him, Mr. President, I don't understand why you don't feel more resentful and hateful for being kept in solitary confinement for the most productive years of your life.  And let me tell you what he said to me.  
He said, "Senator, I became good friends with my jailors.  They were just doing their job.  When I left, Senator, they all lined up to shake my hand and wish me well.  They're my friends."
A much better man than me.  A much better man than almost any man or woman I have met in my whole career.  He inspired us. He challenged us to do better.  He was a good man.  And he met -- the excuse as we say in the United States Senate, a point of personal privilege -- he met my mother's test -- and I mean this sincerely -- what constitutes a good and great person.  My mother used to say, you are defined by your courage and you are redeemed by your loyalty.  Few people I've ever met in my life -- and I've had a chance to meet every major world leader in the past 35 to 40 years -- have met that test like Nelson Mandela.  His courage was undeniable, and his loyalty to all the people -- all the people -- of South Africa was redeeming not just for him, but for South Africa.
I'd ask you to join me, to pause to honor Nelson Mandela with a moment of silence.
Ladies and gentlemen, we need women and men like Nelson Mandela in this moment of great change that's taking place in the world.  We meet at a moment when the course of Asia Pacific affairs in the 21st century is still being written.  The rise of economies up and down the Pacific Rim are literally remaking the world.  But with this growth have come new risks and tensions above and beyond the enduring threats that we face.  And the rules and norms that help advance security and prosperity are still evolving to keep pace with the remarkable changes of the 21st century.
Earlier this year, I had the great honor as the presiding officer in a joint session of Congress to sit behind your President, President Park, as she addressed the Congress assembled.  She spoke both eloquently and passionately.  She spoke of her vision for all our countries -- Korea and America.  She said -- and I quote -- "The shared journey toward peace on the Korea Peninsula, toward cooperation with Northeast Asia, and finally, toward cooperation around the world -- that's the journey we're on together."  A journey we've already embarked upon -- and that's not hyperbole, it's a fact.  And we could not -- we, the United States, could not have any better partner to share that journey with than the Republic of Korea.  
Today, I'd like to take a few moments to speak to you about our vision, President Obama's vision and my vision, for what that journey holds.  Sixty years ago -- sixty years ago -- sixty years of progress and inspiration, from poverty to prosperity, from authoritarianism to democracy, from isolation to total integration in the global economy. 
And how did your parents and grandparents do that?  They did it by betting on you.  By betting on ordinary Koreans -- not the elite, not a special class, but ordinary Koreans.  Because they know what we know in America:  Ordinary people are capable of doing extraordinary things if you give them an opportunity.  They did it by trusting your parents with freedom.  They did it by investing in education and opening your economy, although sometimes slowly, to global competition.  
The result?  The "Miracle on the Han River" that the whole world is aware of, that many nations emerging today from chaos and authoritarianism are attempting to replicate.  We, the United States and Korea, we've grown together as our alliance has, as well -- an alliance born out of blood, sweat and tears of our warriors and yours, standing side-by-side six decades ago, defending the integrity of this country.  
To this day, the American people still support, to the tune of billions of dollars, without complaint -- 28,500 of our sons and daughters standing side-by-side with their Korean brothers and sisters; standing watch, without complaint. 
My son is a Major in the United States Army.  Millions of mothers, like his mother watched him deploy to Iraq, watched his brothers deploy to and from South Korea, because they know -- they know, as difficult as it is, it's necessary, in our interest.  Imagine you deploying, all of you sitting here, the age of my son -- almost 30,000 of you deploying, and your fathers before you for 60 years, to another country without complaint. 
So you might not be surprised I find -- I'm somewhat incredulous when people question our staying power, question whether America means what it says, and does what it says.  It's because of our shared commitment to democracy both at home and abroad, our shared passion to educate our children, allowing them to be the most competitive in the world.  Reflecting that fact is this great university, as well as there are more Korean students studying in my country than the students from Canada and Mexico combined.  A shared conviction that our economic partnership, although sometimes of rough patches, is overwhelmingly in the interest of both our people, creating jobs not here just in Seoul, but in Montgomery, Alabama, and our common sense of pride, a justified pride, in our people -- our parents and our grandparents -- and the sacrifices they made. 
President Obama and I -- and it's really President Obama who did it -- we're proud to name for the first time a son of Korea  -- Sung Kim.  Stand up, Mr. Ambassador.  Where are you? -- the Ambassador to the Korea Republic.  (Applause.)  
President Park's vision of our journey is already taking shape, our alliance as a lynchpin for peace and security in the Asia Pacific.  I was criticized by some a couple of years ago when I said in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing that America is a Pacific power, a resident Pacific power, and we are going nowhere -- nowhere.  We not only stand side-by-side in the Korean Peninsula with all of you, we stand watch around the world.  Korean sailors are fighting piracy off the shores of Somalia.  Korean troops are showing their mettle alongside our own in Afghanistan.  
But the vision is not just limited to security.  Together, Korea and the United States -- the Republic of Korea and the United States are fighting around the world disease, illiteracy, hunger, championing the rights of women.  Witness the response to the crisis in the Philippines.  The Republic of Korea is one of the only countries in the world whose development budget has actually gone up over the past years.  You have not forgotten, apparently, what allowed you to rise again. 
The Koreans and Korean-Americans have assumed positions of world leadership.  Ban Ki Moon, Secretary General of the United Nations; Jim Kim, president of the World Bank -- I could name -- the list goes on.  And now you're getting the Winter Olympics.  Congratulations.  (Laughter.)   Give yourself a round of applause.  (Applause.)  
October is the 60th anniversary.  Think of it.  The last 60 years has been remarkable.  Now, for you students, you say, my God, 60 years, that's four lifetimes.  (Laughter.)  But it's been remarkable.  But as much progress as you've made in the last 60 years, we can make even greater progress together in the next 60 years if we're wise, trust one another, and are willing to make some sacrifices, shaping a peaceful and prosperous Pacific region.  This is one of those inflexion points in history.  We actually have a chance -- a chance to bend history just slightly. 
That's why our administration adopted a policy of what we call "rebalancing" to the region.  Rebalancing economically, diplomatically, and, yes, militarily -- and Barack, the President, and I and the American people are all in.  We're determined to strengthen our alliances, cultivate new partners in the Pacific Basin, build constructive relations with China, pursue major agreements that further integrate our economies, and join and strengthen the institutions of the Asia Pacific and of the East Asian Summit -- APEC, ASEAN and others.  
President Obama is absolutely committed to rebalance.  And to make the point again, no one should underestimate or question our staying power.  Just look at the last 60 years in Korea.  Ask the people of Japan -- the Mutual Defense Treaty since 1960 and still going strong.  Ask the people of the Philippines -- American helicopters, small ships, medical services, road clearing -- all responding on the backs of U.S. Marines when one of the most fierce tropical storms in history devastated their country.  We were there and so was Korea.
And as I speak, my son has just boarded -- my grown son has just boarded a plane, an aircraft -- he’s heading to the Philippines.  His name is Hunter Biden.  He’s Chairman of the World Food Program U.S.A, and he’s going there out in the field, like so many of you did.  I’m so incredibly proud of him, and the tens of thousands of young people around the world who either went or wanted to.  
Or ask the people of Burma.  When their leaders bravely chose to change their country’s path, they looked to America.  And Secretary Clinton was there, and President Obama was there, not only to extend a hand but to help and commit, helping the people of Burma find a better future.  Our commitment to rebalance starts with growing our economies, the lifeblood of this region.  
By the way, when we talk about rebalance here, for years, as the General knows, I was in charge of the Senate of U.S.-European, U.S.-NATO, and U.S. then "Soviet relations.”  All my European friends are saying, what does this mean for us?  Are you leading?  Let me make clear what rebalancing means.  It means adding to, not subtracting from, existing commitments we have around the world.  
What we seek is an open, transparent economic order to deliver the growth for all -- because in growth resides peace.  And we believe the way to sustain and enhance the region’s remarkable economic progress is not just make sure it is physically secure, but to eliminate trade barriers at and behind borders, protections for intellectual property, one set of rules that applies to all companies, domestic or foreign.  These are the principles behind the Korean-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.  
Trade between our countries has already grown 65 percent from $80 billion a year in the year 2000 to $130 billion in 2012. That means employment.  That means the ability to live a middle-class life.  That means stability.  That’s what’s happened.  But before it went into force -- our Free Trade Agreement went into force -- now, it’s in force.  Now that it is, bilateral trade will continue to grow if we fully implement it, and we still have implementation to do.
There’s more work to be done.  We have to end the bureaucratic hurdles that close off trade in key sectors like autos and agriculture.  We have to agree on final regulations that allow financial institutions to operate fully.  And the United States welcomes Korea’s interest in joining the Transpacific Partnership.  The negotiating taking place now literally encompasses 40 percent of the world’s GDP.  That’s without Korea.  With Korea added, it will be impossible for the rest of the world to resist moving toward sane 21st century rules of the road.  
The 21st century demands new standards for trade and commerce.  Think about it -- we talk about 60 years.  At the end of World War II, before the Korean War, our grandfathers and grandmothers, they set in motion an entire new set of rules for economic intercourse and progress, from Bretton Woods all the way up to evolving WTO and so on.  They didn't do that; we did that. 
But the world has changed.  It bears virtually no resemblance.  You know, your parents used the phrase “global economy.”  Your grandparents did.  But they don't fully appreciate it like you do.  I knew the economy was truly global when I was sitting at a computer at my home and my -- I get up to leave and the next thing, I came back and my seven-year-old granddaughter was sitting at the computer with a credit card.  (Laughter.)  We live in a little pond, and she had been out on the pond in this little kayak and she had lost the paddle, it went over the dam.  And she was worried her uncle would find out. So she’s sitting at the computer, and she is buying a kayak paddle from Korea to replace it.  (Laughter.)  
I said, baby, what are you doing?  She said, “Pop, this imputer” -- she called the computer "imputer" -- “this imputer is really good, Pop.”  (Laughter.)  Actually, she was six years old -- it was Naomie.
This is truly a global economy.  And there's a need for new standards on state-owned enterprises, on foreign-direct investment, on fair labor standards, on the environment.  
A number of nations have resisted the call to do more on environmental protection.  But I have an expression that my staff always kids me about -- I guess I overuse it -- I say, reality has a way of intruding.  I was just in Beijing.  Ten years ago, five years ago, I couldn't get any discussion on standards for clean air.  But since 4 million people a year are dying from air pollution, that it was remarkable the two days I was there people talked about they could see the sun.  I’m not being facetious -- the idea that’s a remarkable occurrence that you can see the sun. Reality has intruded.  One of the biggest bilateral efforts we’re trying to move forward with China is renewable energy, reduction of carbon consumption.  
The point is the world has changed.  Of course, all that we hope to accomplish economically for our people depends upon our physical security.  And that starts with our alliances -- South Korea, Japan, Australia, the Philippines, Thailand -- all in the Basin.  We’re modernizing our alliances to meet the demands of the 21st century.  And we’re promoting better cooperation among our allies.  The entire region will be more stable and more secure if -- if -- the leading democracies -- Japan, South Korea and the United States -- are able to improve their relations and cooperation with one another.
Along with our allies, we’re building new security partnerships with the ASEAN on emerging challenges -- maritime security, nonproliferation, disaster relief.  We’re also working to get our relationships with China right, with the right standards.  We’re committed to sustain a positive, cooperative U.S.-Chinese relationship -- because, again, we’re at one of those inflexion points.  It is not written anywhere that this competition is destined to be conflict.  I reject that notion.  Leaders make a difference.  It’s not only in our interest, it’s in the interest of the region, the interest of the world that we get that relationship right with China.  As I said, there will be competition, but the President and I refuse to accept the proposition that it’s inevitably going to result in conflict.  We don’t believe that.  
We’re determined not to repeat the patterns of the past.  And that requires direct, straightforward, and extremely candid discussions with one another.  I’m sure you’ve read, to the extent you read anything about me, that I’m known for being candid.  (Laughter.)  No one ever doubts that I mean what I say. The problem is sometimes I say all that I mean.  (Laughter.)  
You know, you’re studying international relations and you hear about what the most important elements of good relations are.  In international relations, all politics is personal -- I presume to say to you professors -- because it’s all ultimately based on trust.  And trust only flows from personal -- not friendly -- personal, candid relationships with your counterpart, so you don’t have to wonder about intentions.  
That’s how my many hours of discussions with the Chinese leaders this last week were conducted.  They were very direct.  I was very direct about my country’s position on China’s sudden announcement of an Air Defense Identification Zone.  This announcement, to state the obvious, has created considerable apprehension across the region.  But I was absolutely clear on behalf of my President:  We do not recognize the zone.  It will have no effect on American operations.  Just ask my General.  None.  Zero.
I’ve also made it clear that we expect China not to take action that increases tensions at the risk of escalation.  And I was crystal-clear about our commitment to our allies, Korea and Japan.  More broadly, I’ve made clear that there are practical steps countries can take and should take to lower the temperature, to reduce the risk of conflict, including avoiding actions that seem provocative, establishing lines of communication between militaries to manage incidents and prevent escalation.  
My dad used to have an expression -- he’d say, “Joe, the only conflict worse than one that is intended is one that is unintended.”  The possibility of miscalculation, mistake is real, and could have profound consequences for your generation.
I discussed this today with President Park, and we agreed on the need for continued close coordination among Seoul, Tokyo, and Washington.  Countries across this region -- whether the issue is the East China Sea or the South China Sea -- have to develop a common understanding of what constitutes acceptable behavior:  No intimidation; no coercion; and a commitment, backed by actions, to reduce the risk of mistake and miscalculation.  
There is one overreaching issue, though, that not only unites Korea and the United States of America, but unites the entire international community -- and that is the clear and present danger posed by North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs.  But no one knows this better than the citizens of the Republic of Korea.  Let there be no doubt:  The United States is committed to do what it takes to defend our allies and ourselves against North Korean aggression -- period.  The United States and the world have to make it absolutely clear to Kim Jong-un that the international community will not accept or tolerate a nuclear-armed North Korea.  That is the consensus that unites us, whether in Tokyo, Beijing, or in Seoul.
Each head of state with whom I’ve met reaffirmed their determination to see the denuclearization of North Korea.  And North Korea needs to understand that it cannot return to the old pattern of seeking rewards for bad behavior.  We are prepared to go back to six-party talks when North Korea demonstrates its full commitment to complete, verifiable, irreversible denuclearization.
The simple fact is this:  North Korea can never achieve security and prosperity so long as it pursues nuclear weapons -- period.  
But this is about more than weapons.  We will never forget that Koreans –- North and South -– are one people, equally deserving to be treated with dignity.  And we will never accept the notion of the permanent division of the Korean Peninsula.  And you can clap on that.  (Applause.)  
We will not stop working with you for the day when families are finally made whole and Korea is whole.  As we work together to build prosperity and security across this Asia Pacific, we have to do so on a foundation of the values that we share:  Freedom of speech and assembly; freedom of religion; democratic principles.  These are the values that will power success for countries in the 21st century.  And it’s what’s allowed my country and yours to succeed.  
I recently was in Singapore at the end of this summer, and I asked to meet with Lee Kuan Yew -- he’s 92 years old, I believe, now.  He was frail, but his mind was as alert and sharp as a 20-year-old.  I asked him, I said, Mr. President, tell me what’s going on in China -- and I asked about other countries, as well. And he looked at me and said something unusual -- he speaks perfect English -- he looked at me and said, “They’re in America looking for the black box.”  That’s a quote.  And I said, black box?  And he said, yes, you know, like data recorders when there’s an aircraft that goes down.  He said, the black box that contains the secret that allows America to be the only country in the world that every generation or so is able to remake itself.  
I said, I can tell you what’s in that black box -- two secrets.  The first is we are a country of immigrants, constantly -- constantly revitalized by not minor infusion, significant infusion of different cultures, religions, ethnicities from around the world.  That literally is our strength.  
That’s one of the reasons, whatever problems we have with our education system, there’s not a student in America that doesn't have stamped into their DNA the notion that they are rewarded, not criticized, for challenging orthodoxy.  (Applause.) The only way -- and the reason we remain the most innovative nation in the world is the only way you can create a new model is to break the old one.  A constant stream of immigration has allowed us to do that. 
For example, the woman who runs my office was born here in Seoul.  Her parents emigrated.  Her attitude is one of absolute, positive, unvarnished optimism.  Oh, sometimes we retreat, like is going on now.  But on balance from 1789 on, there have been those who want to pull the ladder up and say, “no more,” but those who say, “come” always prevail.  
And the second thing that’s in that box is what I already mentioned.  Unlike any other country in the world, there’s a high premium for students and individuals who challenge orthodoxy.  You are never criticized -- hear me -- never criticized for saying, I don't accept that model.  
The United States is back.  We have rebounded, like you have and others, from the worldwide recession.  And we are ready and we are anxious to compete.  We have created 7.8 million new jobs in 44 months.  We’ve reduced our operating deficit by half.  We are on the road to energy independence.  By the year 2022, North America will be energy-independent, and by the early 2030s, the United States will be totally, completely energy-independent.  We’re the world’s largest producer of petroleum and natural gas on the Earth, including Saudi Arabia and Russia.   
These are some of the many reasons why we’re optimistic.  Most of the reason we’re optimistic is because of our people.  They’re like you.  
Let me close where I started -- reflecting on the lessons of Nelson Mandela, a great man we lost today, who taught us so much about human potential, about what we could become when we refuse to accept the limitations of cynicism and fear.  That’s the story of the history of the journey of my country -- the refusal to accept anything as inevitable -- the absolute refusal; and the determination, although we have not been able to do it and maybe never will, the determination to make a more perfect union, a more peaceful and prosperous world.
I am absolutely convinced that the future belongs to societies that are open, where women are treated exactly equal to men with no exception -- none.  None based on culture.  None based on religion.  None based on any assertion.  (Applause.)  My grandson -- my granddaughters are capable of doing every single, solitary thing without a single exception that my grandson can do.  
There’s a writer in America named Kristof.  He referred to women, and he said, they are half the moon.  My sister -- who is smarter than me, and my best friend, and managed every one of my campaigns -- points out, why in God’s name will we waste half the brainpower, half the imagination, half the initiative, half the capacity of a country or the world?  And nations, as I’ve said twice already, where orthodoxy challenged is rewarded, where your future is not determined by where you were born or what you look like, the color of your skin -- it’s what’s in your mind, what’s in your heart.
That's why I am so confident, so confident that Korea and the United States will continue to be allies and kindred spirits for a long time to come.  It’s not merely our economic, our political and our strategic necessity for one another; it is ultimately based on shared common values.
And so I think your future is bright.  I’m always quoting Irish poets, as the American press is tired of hearing.  (Laughter.)  They always think, and my colleagues think, I quote Irish poets because I’m Irish.  I am.  (Laughter.)  But that's not the reason.  I quote Irish poets because they're the best poets in the world.  (Laughter.)  That's why I quote them.
My favorite poet, who just passed away, Seamus Heaney, wrote in a poem called “The Cure at Troy,” about his Ireland, metaphorically.  But there’s a stanza in that poem that I think should become the anthem of all of you -- not just you young people.  If you notice if you ever follow the American press, I’m always referred to as the White House Optimist, like -- as my grandpop would say, like I’m the guy that fell off the turnip truck yesterday.  I’ve been there longer than all of them.  But I’m more optimistic than I was when I was elected as a 29-year-old senator a month before I was constitutionally eligible to take office under our Constitution because I know the history of the journey of my country.  But Heaney said it best in his poem. He says, “History says, don't hope on this side of the grave.  But then once in this lifetime, that longed-for tidal wave of justice rises up and hope and history rhyme.”
You have a chance.  We have a chance to make hope and history rhyme so that your children and grandchildren will never live through a period like your grandparents and great grandparents lived through.  
God bless the Republic of Korea.  May God bless the United States and may God protect our troops.  
Thank you very much.  (Applause.) 
END
3:29 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 04, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and President Xi Jinping of the People's Republic of China
Great Hall of the  Beijing, People’s Republic of China 
    PRESIDENT XI:  Honorable Vice President Biden, let me again warmly welcome you to China, my old friend.
  You have long been committed to the growth of China-U.S. relations, and I commend you for the large amount of work you have taken.  And I hope your current visit will help us to further deepen mutual trust, exchanges, and cooperation between China and the United States.  
  The China-U.S. relationship has gotten off to a good start since the beginning of this year and has generally maintained the momentum of positive development.  In my two meetings with President Obama -- first at the Annenberg estate, and then in St. Petersburg -- we agreed to work together to build a new model called Major Country Relationship between China and the United States based on mutual respect and win-win cooperation.  In so doing, we set a direction for the future growth of this relationship.  
  We’re happy to see that in the recent period our two teams have worked actively to expand coordination and cooperation on bilateral, regional, and global levels, and helped to make important progress in our bilateral relationship.
  At present, both the international situation and the regional landscape are undergoing profound and complex changes.  The world economy has come into a period of in-depth readjustment.  Regional hotspot issues keep cropping up and there are more pronounced global challenges such as climate change and energy security.  The world as a whole is not tranquil.  As the world’s two largest economies and two permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, China and the United States shoulder important responsibilities for upholding world peace and stability and promoting human development and progress.  To strengthen dialogue and cooperation is the only right choice facing both countries.  
  We will soon enter into the 35th year of our diplomatic relationship.  For over 30 years, our relationship has gone through a lot and made historical progress.  Looking ahead to the future, we stand ready to work with the U.S. side to continue to move in the right direction, building a new model of Major Country Relations, respect each other’s core interests and major concerns, continue to enhance practical cooperation, and increase our communication and coordination on international, regional and global issues, to appropriately handle sensitive issues and differences between us so that together we can make sure our bilateral relationship will continue to move forward in a sustained, healthy and stable way.
  VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you very much.  And I say to your colleagues I hope you don't think that I trespassed on taking advantage of my friendship with the President to keep him as long as I did in the other room.  But I thank you very much, Mr. President, for the opportunity to meet with you again.
  As we’ve discussed in the past, this new model of major country cooperation ultimately has to be based on trust and a positive notion about the motive of one another.  The relationship that you and President Obama have established thus far is full of promise and real opportunity for us.  If we get this relationship right, engender a new model, the possibilities are limitless.
  This is a hugely consequential bilateral relationship that is going to play a significant part in affecting the course of the 21st century.  And we're fortunate that at the moment to have two men leading each of our countries who have the capacity to maybe bring this to fruition.
  You pointed out all the change that is taking place in the world and the challenges it presents -- they present.  But the way I was raised was to believe that change presents opportunity -- opportunity on regional security -- on a global level; opportunity on climate change, energy, and a whole range of issues that the world needs to see change in the next decade or so.   
  As you have pointed out, Mr. President, complex relationships call for sustained, high-level engagement.  And that's why I'm here.  And that's why I am so grateful, and so is the President, that you would give me the time to attempt to help further develop that engagement.  As we've both acknowledged in the past, this new relationship requires practical cooperation to deliver concrete results.  We've done much of that already.
  Because I have had the benefit of being around for a long time as a senator and as the Vice President, I've had the opportunity to engage, not directly, but peripherally, with a number of world leaders.  The thing that has impressed me from the beginning, and I stated to the President early on, after his meetings with you, which he concluded as well, is that you are candid, you are constructive in developing this new relationship. And both qualities are sorely needed.  Candor generates trust.  Trust is the basis on which real change, constructive change is made.  And I am delighted to be back with you.
   END  
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 03, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden in Closing at Roundtable Discussion on Women in the Japanese Economy
DeNA Headquarters
Tokyo, Japan
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Well, thank you, Ambassador.  Look, first of all, thank you all very much.  This has been both interesting, intriguing, and very important. 
As was pointed out, I’m not going to identify each of the panelists, for I haven’t asked their permission to who said what. But as has been pointed out, Japan, like many other countries around the world, in Europe and in Asia as well, is running into a bit of a conundrum, which is that birth rates are slowing and/or declining and/or in the negative territory, both in Europe and in parts of Asia -- in Japan.  And I am often kidded by the President for using the phrase I guess I use frequently that reality has a way of intruding.  Reality is intruding in a way, not only here in Japan but around the world, to make it clear to national leaders that, as Nick Kristof said, women are half the sky.  Women are half the sky.  They are half the brainpower.  They are half the energy.  They’re half the innovation.  And so many countries, including to some degree ours, wastes that asset -- waste that asset. 
And so it’s not only the right thing to do based on issues of equality that we feel very strongly about -- the President and I and the Ambassador, both Ambassadors -- but it has profound, direct economic impact on the GDP of a country.  And so one of the good things that’s occurred is the growing realization, in some places out of necessity -- I’m not just speaking in Japan now -- out of necessity, that women have to be fully included and engaged in the workforce and in leadership.
I said earlier that some advocates argue that the reason to have women more involved in leadership positions is they’re gentler and kinder.  I’ve never found that to be the case.  (Laughter.)  They’re as tough, they’re as strong, they’re as everything as a man is, and vice versa.  But the important thing that’s different is, just like men, they bring a different perspective -- a different perspective.  And that perspective sometimes shines the light on the avenue that no one thought about pursuing.
I was telling them I recently met with Lee Kuan Yew in Singapore -- he is much older now.  I think he’s 92.  He’s not in the same physical condition, but his mind is as sharp and as incisive as it ever has been.  And I asked him -- I said, what’s going on in this part of the world?  What’s going on in China now?  What’s going on in India?  He said, “Well, they’re in America looking for the black box.  They’re looking for that thing that allows Americans to remake themselves as a country every generation or two.”  And I said, I can tell them what’s in the black box -- a constant stream of immigration and diversity, bringing totally new perspectives, totally new perspectives, and ultimately being totally integrated into the society, and it’s stamped in every American’s DNA that you get rewarded for challenging orthodoxy. 
Well, the most important orthodoxy to challenge around the world is the orthodoxy that says somehow, women have a limited role.  Somehow, women -- there are certain things women can’t do. I’ve said this many times in America, and I’ll continue to say it.  I personally will not rest till my four granddaughters have every single, solitary opportunity my grandson has.  And I mean every.  I don’t mean some; I mean every.  There’s not a single thing that a man can do that a woman cannot do.  And until we begin to face up to that, we’re going to be having an incredible amount of wasting assets out there.  But it’s also -- guess what -- the right thing to do.
And the last thing I’ll say is that I, too, compliment Prime Minister Abe on the initiative to bring more women into the workforce, sustain them in the workforce, give them similar opportunities.  And the $3 billion commitment that Japan has made around the world for women in areas of the world where we have -- who not only don’t have job opportunities, but are treated as property, where they are viewed as being owned by their husbands -- cultures where people say it’s all right to physically abuse a woman.  There is never, never, never, in any culture, anyplace, anywhere, that makes it justified for a man to treat a woman physically in an inhumane way.  I don’t care what the culture is. It’s about time we shred these notions.
And so Japan is leading the way in many of these areas around the world, and it looks like it’s decided to write a new chapter.  And by the way, we in America have a long way to go as well.  But there’s an inevitability to this march.  There’s an inevitability to it.  And I’m delighted to be here with six people, two men and four women, who have slightly different perspectives on how to do it, but absolutely firmly committed to the notion that the women of Japan hold Japan’s future in their hand as well as any man in Japan holds the future.
So thank you all for having me.  It’s been a great honor to be with you.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 03, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan
The Kantei
Tokyo, Japan
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  I am very much delighted to welcome Vice President Biden here in Japan after meeting in Singapore in July.  We had discussion in a candid manner over various matters of interest between the United States and Japan an issues surrounding this region.
First and foremost, Vice President Biden and I confirmed that the United States and Japan alliance will continue to play a pivotal role for peace and stability of this region.
Then we discussed announcement of establishing East China Sea air defense identification zone, or ADIZ, by China and confirmed that we should not tolerate the attempt by China to change status quo unilaterally by force, and we will continue to work closely in dealing with the situation based on strong U.S.-Japan alliance.
Above all, we reaffirmed that policies and measures, including those on operation of the self-defense forces and U.S. forces will not change, and that we will meet in close cooperation.  We further agreed that we will not condone any action that could threaten safety of civilian aircraft.
Then I explained that the government of Japan will work on construction over time of a replacement facility in a resolute manner, given its extreme importance in advancing cooperation based on alliance.
On TPP, I stated that at the final phase of negotiation, political solution has to be sought on difficult issues for participating countries.  I explained farther that Japan and the United States need to solve major pending issues through cooperation, and then should show a path toward conclusion of negotiation within this year.
We also affirmed that U.S.-Japan cooperation is not confined to this region, but rather is expanding in diversified sectors throughout the world, such as cooperation in Southeast Asia, support to Middle East, support for women, health care among others.  And we will continue to work together in those areas.
I look to continue our discussion over dinner reception after this on various topics as a testament of Japan-U.S. cooperation relationship.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for your hospitality and for the great discussion.  We had good meetings in Singapore, and you had a great meeting with President Obama.  And I was present, and it’s good to see you again.
We meet at a moment, Mr. Prime Minister, when a new Asia Pacific is emerging with limitless potential, but also new dynamics, rising tensions and the risk of miscalculation.
And just as we have for more than six decades, the United States looks to our alliance with Japan as the cornerstone of stability and security in East Asia, and we are fully committed to our announced strategy of rebalancing as well in the Pacific.
The Prime Minister and I also discussed how to make an already very strong alliance even stronger, how to modernize it to meet the challenges and opportunities of this new century. 
The President and I are determined, the United States is determined to implement our roadmap to relocate the base for Futenma as quickly as possible.  As we discussed in some length the strengthening of the U.S.-Japanese alliance, it’s also important to see closer cooperation and better relations between our allies -- Japan and South Korea -- and as was discussed briefly between our allies and China.
I told the Prime Minister in the larger bilateral meeting, as well as of our private meeting that I witnessed firsthand, and we appreciate greatly the outreach he has made to Japan’s neighbors.  It’s in not only Japan’s interest, but it’s in our interest as well.
Of course, as the Prime Minister mentioned our alliance extends far beyond Northeast Asia.  It’s a global platform to act on values and interests that we share.  And today we talked about new global commitments.  The new initiative to support disaster relief and recovery, training in Southeast Asia, building on the work that we’ve done together in the Philippines to respond to the deadly typhoon, stronger cooperation on maritime security throughout the Asia Pacific; and new U.S.-Japanese development dialogue to help communities from the Lower Mekong to Sub Saharan Africa.
And lastly and consequentially, an $800 million contribution from Japan, unlocking an additional $400 million from the United States to combat the worldwide spread of infectious diseases such as AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. 
We have no ally in closer collaboration with us on the many challenges facing us in the Middle East, whether it’s the issue of preventing a nuclear-armed Iran, supporting the Palestinian economy, which Japan is doing and has done, or responding to the humanitarian crisis in Syria.  In each of these matters and many more, Japan is making significant contributions to global security.  And we thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for those efforts.  They benefit us all.
Today, as the Prime Minister mentioned, we discussed China’s sudden announcement of a new air defense identification zone.  We, the United States, are deeply concerned by the attempt to unilaterally change the status quo in the East China Sea.  This action has raised regional tensions and increased the risk of accidents and miscalculation.  We are closely consulting with our allies on this matter, here in Japan and in Korea, and I will -- which I will soon visit later this week.
The world should not forget that our alliances have been critical for the stability that has made this region’s remarkable progress possible.  And I told the Prime Minister that we will remain steadfast in our alliance commitments.
The United States has an interest in the lowering of tensions in this vital region, as I believe all the countries of Northeast Asia share that same interest with us.
This underscores the need for crisis management mechanisms and effective channels of communication between China and Japan to reduce the risk of escalation.
I’ll be raising these concerns with great specificity directly when I meet with Chinese leadership the day after tomorrow.
Mr. Prime Minister, if you’ll forgive a personal reference, my father had an expression.  He said, the only conflict that is worse than one that is intended is one that is unintended.  The prospect for miscalculation mistake is too high.
We also spoke at length about our economic relationships. We’re in the final stages of negotiating a Trans-Pacific Partnership that would link together a dozen economies from Singapore to Peru, 40 percent of the world’s GDP.
To state the obvious, for the countries involved, the decisions and the compromises that need to be made are very sensitive and very difficult.  The upsides of getting such an agreement done are almost beyond comprehension.  They're incredibly positive for all countries involved.
But the reward does not diminish the realization of how difficult the compromises needed are -- needed to be made are.  We need a comprehensive agreement that involves longstanding differences between the United States and Japan, including issues like agriculture and automobiles.  And it’s difficult.
The TTP will increase trade and investment, help our businesses create jobs and put in place a powerful constituency for open markets, for a rules-based competition and for higher standards for labor, the environment, and intellectual property protection.
Unlike the bulk of the 20th century, the 21st century is a global economy.  And we need to establish new economic rules of the road that allow our countries to prosper together.
And finally, as we discussed, beyond our alliance, our military alliance, our economic cooperation, our global cooperation, it is ultimately based on the people-to-people ties that are the lifeblood of this alliance.  It rests on commitment to democracy, shared values and a genuine respect for one another. 
I visited Japan not long after the 3/11 earthquake and tsunami.  I witnessed firsthand the devastation, the neighborhoods that have been destroyed.  But I also witnessed something else -- the rebuilding and the indomitable spirit of the Japanese people.  It was truly impressive.
In my capacity as United States senator and Vice President, I visited many disaster areas around the world over the past three decades.  But I’ve never seen the kind of response that I saw here.  It was an absolute worldwide advertisement of the character and the spirit and the culture of the Japanese people.  No one complained.  Everyone got back up.  They all continued to move forward, it was remarkable.  And it is remarkable.
Mr. Prime Minister, I’m not sure there is a more resilient nation on Earth than yours.  I was proud that we were able to play a small part to help save lives -- not only with U.S. troops, but with American volunteers who know and love Japan; many of whom are still here rebuilding.
As a consequence, Mr. Prime Minister, we’ve created an initiative named after the Japanese word for friendship that is going to bring together young Japanese and young American leaders.
Mr. President [sic], it’s not only our alliance, it’s the friendship between our countries and our people.  It’s tried and it’s true.  It’s been tested by time and tragedy, and it still grows stronger to the benefit of both our countries, the region and I would suggest to the world.
Thank you, Mr. President.  I’m looking forward to dinner.  (Laughter.) 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 19, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and President Ricardo Martinelli of Panama
Presidential Palace
Panama City, Panama
11:42 A.M. EST
PRESIDENT MARTINELLI:  (As interpreted.)  Thank you very much.  First of all, I would like to welcome Vice President Joseph Biden and his entire team, made up of senators, representatives and mayors from various cities in the United States, as well as their aides. 
This has been a very profitable meeting in which we have discussed a variety of subjects, among which is the subject of security -- regional security -- and the ongoing support that Panama and the United States contribute for hemispheric security with everything involving drug trafficking, terrorism, and other forms of trafficking.
Likewise we have discussed the expansion of the Canal and how significant and important it is for world commerce, as well as, very specially, for the East Coast of the United States.  It is imperative and necessary that the ports on the East Coast of the United States increase the dredging capability of their ports and go to at least 50 feet depth in order to take advantage of the new sizes of ships -- the post-Panamax ships that will be able to transit the Panama Canal with the expansion.  For that purpose, it’s necessary for the East Coast ports in the United States to increase their depth to 50 feet.  This will bring a number of benefits not only for Panama and for the world economy, but also for the enormous amount of jobs and other opportunities that will be created in an enormous number of ports in the United States.
As you well know, the Panamanian government and the Panama Canal have begun the expansion of the Canal, and this Canal expansion leads to a completion in 2015.  And likewise, we have discussed with Vice President Biden that already the United States and a number of other friendly countries must begin to study the possibility of Canal expansion, to do the appropriate studies so that when they’re done in a few years, what is called a fourth set of locks be completed, because as you well know, the world maritime community is continually innovating and increasing capabilities, and therefore, there is great potential for Panama to continue taking advantage of its position as a multimodal hub, which is very well complemented by what is happening in the ports along the East Coast of the United States.
We've also discussed the diplomatic and commercial relationship between Panama and the United States, and both governments will continue to work on the improvement of these relations and in order to increase world trade and hemispheric security.
Many thanks.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. President, let me begin by saying it’s great to be with you again.  You’ve been a great friend to my country and you’ve been a good friend to me.  And I appreciate it very much.
Folks, we had a terrific conversation with the President and his Cabinet.  And my colleagues and I -- the mayors of some of the largest cities in America, as well as United States Senator Johnny Isakson from the great state of Georgia, and the gentlewoman, the Congresswoman from south Florida -- we had one of the best conversations that I've experienced, and I've been doing this a long time.
And I want to thank you, Mr. President, your administration, and the Panamanian people, for your friendship to the United States of America.  And again, I want to personally thank the Panamanian people for that friendship.
You know, modernizing the Canal, Mr. President, is an investment in your future, but it is also a consequential investment in the future of the United States of America.  It protects Panama’s unique place in the world economy as a new generation of massive container ships and tankers hits the high seas.  You're moving from the ability to accommodate a ship that's 106 feet wide to a ship that's 160 feet wide, doubling the commerce.  And it’s an incredible consequence to this global economy.
But the reason I traveled here -- with our Secretary of Transportation, Anthony Foxx; the Senator from Georgia, Senator Isakson; the Congresswoman from Florida, Debbie Wasserman- Shultz; the Atlanta Mayor -- the Mayor of Atlanta, Kasim Reed; the Mayor of Baltimore, Stephanie Rollins-Blake; and the Mayor of Philadelphia, Michael Nutter -- and your press may be asking, why am I mentioning each of their names.  I mention each of their names because they are in and they lead cities that have the potential to vastly expand the economic commerce, the jobs and the economy of their states and cities as a consequence of what the Panamanian people have done.
And it matters -- it matters a great deal to the American people.  It matters to our manufacturers.  It matters to our farmers, our Merchant Marine, and our longshoremen.  It matters a great deal, as you know, Mr. President, to businessmen that will enable American business to be more competitive.  People locate businesses and manufacturing facilities in places where they can quickly, cheaply, and responsibly get their product to market.  That only occurs if there is serious infrastructure to accommodate what the world economy is witnessing as a consequence of the Canal being widened, because when goods travel faster and cheaper, it increases commerce around the world. 
And it matters to the people those businesses will hire because this will create jobs -- not only jobs it's already created in Panama, but jobs in the United States of America and up and down the Americas.  The fact of the matter is these are not just ordinary jobs, these are good, decent jobs -- jobs you can raise a middle-class family on, jobs that you can care for your family. 
So that’s a long way of saying, Mr. President, we owe you and the people of Panama for continuing to have a forward-looking vision and not only strengthening your country, but quite frankly, strengthening the Hemisphere. 
It's also a reflection of a larger reality, Mr. President, that you and I have talked about in the past and again today, and that is the Americans -- the Americas, the Western Hemisphere, I say to all the people of Panama -- the Western Hemisphere is emerging as a region of opportunity.  In the mind of President Obama and me, there is no reason why the 20th century -- the 21st century will not be led by the Western Hemisphere as the center of gravity for the world economy.
Latin America, for the first time in our lifetime, has -- first time in history -- has 150 million people who are middle class, and strong -- for the first time.  For the first time in history you can look from Canada to the tip of Argentina and envision a hemisphere that is democratic, middle class, and secure -- and growing.  That has never occurred before in history.
The world's -- Latin America, particularly North America, is emerging as the energy center of gravity for the world.  It's shifting to the Western Hemisphere; from the sands of the Arabian Peninsula to the Western Hemisphere.  It will be the new center of gravity for energy production in the world.  We can now realistically envision and work toward, as I said, an Americas that are secure, middle class and democratic from the continent -- from Canada all the way to the tip of South America.
The question in my country is no longer what I believe Latin Americans are tired of hearing -- this notion of a benevolent America, the United States, what can we do for our brethren in the Hemisphere.  It's no longer that.  That’s not how President Obama and I look at it.  We look at it as what can we do together -- what can we do together.  And what you've done with the Canal is an example of the mutual contributions being made. 
This is a region -- the Hemisphere is a region that is growing and has unlimited potential.  And so it's what can we do together -- no longer -- as I said earlier, it's no longer these assertions of America's backyard.  This is the front yard.  This is a different world.  This is a different set of opportunities for all of us.  And that’s what President Martinelli and I spoke about today, and, I must admit, we've spoken about it in the past privately. 
We discussed the next steps forward in our economic partnership.  The United States supports Panama's long-term ambition to build an economy that rivals Singapore; one where there is fair competition, high standards, the rule of law, and transparent and open markets.  That is the future.  That will be the gold standard.  That’s the standard to which countries will repair, attract investment and jobs and growth.
These are the principles behind the U.S.-Panama Free Trade Agreement.  And in the years since it went in force, trade between the United States and Panama has already grown in one year by 18 percent. 
But there's much more work to be done.  We support Panama's effort to level the economic playing field, reduce corruption -- something every country has to contend with.  We want to work together to iron out the last unresolved issues to fully implement the trade agreement that we have made. 
And just as you connect the Atlantic and Pacific, Mr. President, Panama can be the economic bridge between the North and the South in a literal sense.  That’s the choice for Panamanians to make, not for the United States, but you can be that bridge.  The benefits of greater regional economic integration in connecting roads, energy grids, markets, they are considerable.  They're considerable not only for Panama but for the hemisphere.  As President Obama said in Costa Rica in May, if you and your neighbors choose this path, the United States will be there and help you get there. 
You know, we're ready right now to make it easier for personal travel to take place, make it easier for Panamanians to travel to the United States.  Today, I'm pleased to announce on behalf of President Obama that Panama will be the newest member of the U.S. Global Entry Program.  That means Panamanian citizens can be prescreened to travel faster through immigration ports in the United States of America.  Facilitating the flow of people is good for trade, it's good for tourism, and it's good for relationships between the countries.  It's a reflection of our friendship and our trust in Panama and the Panamanian people.  And we're honored that President Martinelli will be the first Panamanian citizen to take part in this.
And I want to say to your Minister of Security, Mr. Mulino, the great work that Panama has done on the security side of the equation. 
As we streamline the travel and trade, we're also working together to stop illegal trafficking.  Panama has interdicted 175 metric tons of cocaine.  Cooperation between our law enforcement agencies is excellent and been at a peak that hasn't existed before.  And Panama is rising and in some cases exceeding its responsibilities not only to us, but to the region. 
And so last July, a vessel traveling through the Panama Canal from Cuba to North Korea claimed it was carrying sugar.  Well, it was a sweet cargo, but it wasn't sugar.  It wasn't sugar.  And Panama did something we haven't come to expect everywhere in the world -- it stepped up.  It stepped up where others might have stepped back.  We think it's a violation of U.S. sanctions [sic].  But, nonetheless, Panama stepped up.  You found and confiscated weapons heading from Cuba to North Korea. 
The United States is thankful for your taking on that international responsibility.  And you made a significant contribution for real to global security, not just U.S. security.  We are pretty well capable of handling our own security.  But you contributed to global security.  That is what responsible nations do and that's what you have done.
And as a member of the Organization of American States, we also made a collective commitment -- you and I and the Organization of American States -- to hold free and fair elections.  President Martinelli reaffirmed his commitment to that today. 
It's larger than any one of us.  Each democratic success story, each democratic election stacked upon one another, strengthens the entire hemisphere.  That's how the hemisphere is being built.  Panama has an opportunity to do just that again when you go to the polls in 2014. 
And I look forward, as I've told the President, today, after leaving here and going to my embassy, and we're going to go to the Canal, I'm also going to meet with the respective presidential candidates in the 2014 election. 
And, finally, I updated President Martinelli and his colleagues in our efforts to achieve comprehensive immigration reform.  It is the priority for the President and me now.  We need -- we need -- to update and make more rational our immigration policy in the United States of America.  It's a matter of simple justice and respect.  Respect and dignity needs to be brought to the 11 million undocumented men, women and children, allowing them to come out of the shadows.  They are not only Hispanic.  They represent every part of the world.  They are Asian.  They are Irish.  They are Russian.  They are African.  But they deserve to be treated with dignity. 
In my experience in the family I come from, you measure a man or woman in how they feel about you and how they treat the people who are like you.  This is a matter -- this is a matter of respect.  This is a matter of hemispheric respect, in my view.
And so, when we respect your countrymen on our soil, I hope that sends the message as to how we feel -- that we respect you and all folks in the hemisphere.  And we do.  But it's also a matter, as you pointed out in your own immigration policy here, Mr. President, it's also a matter of just naked self-interest -- naked self-interest. 
Our Congressional Budget Office, sort of the gold standard of what constitutes economic growth -- our Congressional Budget Office recently estimated that the comprehensive immigration reform the President and I are pushing will grow the U.S. economy by $1.4 trillion over the next decade and a half -- $1.4 trillion. 
I was saying that recently -- I've traveled about 800,000 miles since being Vice President.  I was recently in Singapore.  And if I can say, I told the President -- and this is not part of my formal remarks -- but I met with one of the wisest men that most leaders around the world have sought out -- Lee Kuan Yew, a former President of Singapore.  And I sat with him.  And he is 92 years old, and his health is somewhat frail, but his mind is, as my mother would say, sharp as a tack.  I don't know how you translate that into Spanish.  (Laughter.)  
But I sat with him and I said, “Mr. President, what is China doing now?”  He said, the Chinese are in America, “The United States looking for that black box that is buried.”  And I'm thinking black box?  What does he mean by that?  It's like the flight recorder data in an aircraft.  I said, black box?  He said, yes.  He said, “That secret that allows the United States to be the only country in the world that constantly is able to remake itself, to reinvent itself.” 
And, I said, oh, Mr. President, I can tell you what's in that black box.  It's a constant stream of immigration.  It's the constant refurbishing of the energy of America by new cultures, new language, new people. 
And, I said the second thing in that black box is every America has stamped in their DNA, whether they are immigrants or they are born there, that they have -- every young student is encouraged to shed the notion of respect for orthodoxy.  The only way new things happen is when orthodoxy is put aside.  That's the secret of the United States of America.  And Panama and the rest of this hemisphere is a big part of the secret of our success.
So I came to say thank you, Mr. President -- thank you, thank the Panamanian people -- and I look forward to this relationship continuing to grow and prosper.  And as a consequence of what you've done at the Canal, we have the possibility of expanding our economy by hundreds of billions of dollars over the near term. 
So, thank you, Mr. President.  And I look forward to seeing you again.  (Applause.)  
END
12:03 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 November 19, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Panama Canal
Panama Canal, Panama
4:15 P.M. EST
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, distinguished guests, and to the 9,500 workers who are expanding this Canal, on behalf of the United States of America, thank you.  Thank you for what you're doing.
I've been traveling up and down the East Coast of the United States and into the heart of the Midwest of our country and down to the Gulf of Mexico, telling the American people that something big is happening here in Panama that will have a profound effect on the economy of the United States of America.  By the widening and deepening of the Panama Canal, you're making not only a major investment, Mr. President, in your company's future -- your country's future, but in my country's future.  You're providing a service not only to the Panamanian people but the United States, the hemisphere and the entire world. 
I came here today from the Port of Houston in the state of Texas.  In 1956, the world's first container ship, the Ideal X, sailed into the Port of Houston.  Instead of sacks and crates and boxes carried neatly in the hull of the ship, on top of that ship were stacked containers on its deck.  In an instant, the shipping costs for a ton of cargo were reduced by 97 percent.  It changed global commerce. 
What you're doing here today, and what my colleagues and I are witnessing, is going to change global commerce.  It's shifting once again.  A new generation of massive vessels, known as post-Panamax ships, are able to carry twice or even three times as many containers as what has come before.  These ships are wider, longer, and their drafts are deeper.
I just looked at "the old Canal."  It can accommodate a 106-foot-wide ship.  The Canal being built here will accommodate 160-foot-wide ships.  The arrival of these new ships presents an opportunity for countries to transport goods more cheaply than ever before.  But it's also a challenge for all of us in the rest of the world to modernize to accommodate the infrastructure that you're building here, Mr. President.
People use the phrase all the time, "it's a global economy."  I'm not sure they fully understand that exactly, it is a global economy.  Seventy-five percent of all the commerce in the world as I speak is floating somewhere in the ocean as I speak, containing 75 percent of the world's commerce.  And what you're doing here in Panama is a next level -- is taking commerce to a brand-new level. 
That’s exactly what Panama is doing right now.  The Canal has two lanes that cannot handle these post-Panamax ships -- but not for long.  By the end of 2015, these massive new locks will open and be able to accommodate ships with 50-foot drafts, not 39.5; 1,200-feet long, not 965-feet long; 160-feet wide, not 106-feet wide.  The Panama Canal Authority estimates that it will double the amount of cargo -- double the amount of cargo -- that passes through this Canal now by the year 2015. 
And I'm here with my colleagues -- the Mayor of Atlanta, the Mayor of Baltimore, the Mayor of Philadelphia, and, ladies and gentlemen, the Senator from the state of a little old port called Savannah in the state of Georgia, and the Mayor from that state, and our Secretary of Transportation -- because it affects -- it will affect drastically, what's happening here, their communities, their people.  And it's going to require us to invest in 21st infrastructure like you're doing.
And I'm here because I believe that the cutting-edge Panama Canal and the investments that it inspires and the trade that it will make possible can be part of the story of the economic continued revival of the United States of America and the hemisphere. 
It's no secret that in 2008, the United States and the world went through a heck of a difficult time -- the greatest recession in our history short of a depression.  But we fought our way back.  U.S. businesses have created 7.8 million new jobs in the last 44 months.  Manufacturing is coming back to the United States.  We've created 500,000 new manufacturing jobs.  Our auto manufacturers have created an additional 325,000 jobs.  We now produce more natural gas than any country on Earth.  And for the first time, we've imported less oil than we have consumed -- than we produce in the United States. 
The reason I bother to say this is that the next phase here, the next phase is to take advantage of what this new commerce will do.  We know in America these representatives, Democrat and Republican, know in my home state, my states, they understand that manufacturers locate where they can cheaply, efficiently and economically get their cargo to a worldwide market. 
We still have a way to go in the United States, but we've made significant progress.  Our companies are competing, exporting to every country, every corner of the world.  And we're once again an engine of economic growth with the potential to create a next generation of good-paying jobs, as the jobs you're providing here are, Mr. President.
You've weathered that worldwide recession in part because of this bold commitment you and your people have made.  And we're ready for the new Panama Canal to contribute to our economic renewal as well.  And your project is profoundly in the interest of my country.  Two-thirds of everything that passes through the Panama Canal is either coming from or going to the United States of America.  So when the Canal doubles its capacity, the United States has a potential to expand exports at a considerably lower cost and considerably higher volume. 
So if we make the right investments at home, we will allow the United States ports to handle larger ships coming through this modernized Canal.  When exports can carry two to three times more in each container ship, that saves business.  That saves money.  That saves shipping costs.  That saves fuel.  And it makes manufacturers and farmers in America more competitive. 
For example, one-third of the U.S. grain and soybean exports travel through your canal.  By one estimate, each bushel will be about 35 percent -- 35 cents cheaper because of this Canal, making American farmers even more competitive. 
Building up our ports to handle the increased cargo will also create jobs for longshoreman, construction workers, engineers and others, dredging ports, widening docks, building new storage, also having intermodal changes in our railroads, in our Interstate Highway System. 
So I'm here with a simple, Mr. President, but heartfelt message to the people of Panama:  Thank you.  Thank you for having the courage to embark on this significant adventure here.
After telling so many others about the new and improved Panama Canal that's emerging, I decided, and my colleagues, that we've got to come down and see it for ourselves.  Instead of preaching to the choir, we wanted to be with the choir.  We wanted to make sure we saw it.  And I brought with me our Secretary of Transportation, Anthony Foxx; Georgia Senator -- one of the leading members of the United States Senate -- Johnny Isakson, representing the Port of Savannah, which, I might add, is responsible for more than $67 billion in economic activity and supports 350,000 full-time and part-time jobs across the state of Georgia, including in the city of Atlanta, it's largest city. 
The Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed is here with me today as well, because it affects the standard of living in his city.  Florida Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, she represents ports bringing more than 400,000 jobs to Floridians.  Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, where her port sends $22 billion in U.S. goods around the world with the label "Made In America" on them.  And Mayor Michael Nutter of my adopted hometown -- more than 2 million tons a year of containerized cargo pass through the Port of Philadelphia.  All of that, all of them have the ability to profoundly expand employment and income for their states. 
So, Mr. President, you may be surprised to learn that you have fans far afield.  You found out today, in Baltimore, Maryland; and Atlanta, Georgia; and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; in South Florida.  Today -- I hope I don’t get you in trouble, Mr. President, but today, as we left our bilateral meeting, we then had an expanded meeting with my colleagues.  And I turned around as we were leaving and I wondered where the President was -- the President was surrounded by each of my colleagues bidding for him -- please come to Philadelphia, please come to Baltimore, please come to Atlanta.  (Laughter.)  I’m serious.
So I just want to say to the people of Panama, this is a very important thing for the United States.  This new and improved Canal will also benefit Panama, to state the obvious, bringing an economic windfall in the form of greater revenue.  It will help Panama remain an indispensable part of the global economy. 
And as the energy production throughout the Americas grows, Panama is going to play a critical role in bridging energy supplies in the Atlantic with a growing demand in the Pacific.  This is good business.  This is good for Panama.  And it’s clear that the world of opportunity is available to those willing to make the necessary investments to compete in the 21st century. 
Panama is making that investment, and the United States has to do the same now.  We’re ready.  When the United States passed what we call in the States the Recovery Act, it included $48 billion in new infrastructure -- the largest public works project in America since the construction of the Interstate Highway System.  Each port, though, has different needs.  There are different places.  Bridges need to be made higher.  Wharfs need to be made longer.  Berths need to be made wider.  Water needs to be dredged.  Communities across our country are working to address these problems, and through federal grants, we’re working to modernize state and public funding. 
That $48 billion the federal government supplied generated well over $150 billion in private investment and state investment.  The $10 billion [sic] we invested in one of the ports generated in that port another $80 million. 
So, folks, look, this is about the totality of how our infrastructure connects.  As Secretary Foxx says, it’s about the first mile and the last mile of infrastructure that gets American exports from the factory floor to the decks of ships.  For example, it’s about how a rail line in Ohio connects shipping to the Port of Baltimore.  That’s why we put in $50 million in investment and it generated multifold in that in terms of being able to have access to the ports.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me say what I’ve said to you privately on other occasions and I say publicly:  We thank the people of Panama.  And I want you to know, speaking for President Obama and myself, the day is long passed when America looks out and saw a backyard.  This is no backyard.  This is the yard -- this is the front yard.  The hemisphere is growing. 
For the first time in history, you can picture from Canada to the tip of Argentina a hemisphere that is democratic, middle-class, secure, as the leading engine of economic growth in the world in the 21st century.  And Panama will play a critical part in that.
So, Mr. President, it’s not what we can do for you -- what you’re doing for us and what we can do with you.  The historic expansion of the Canal that is underway shows how strong Panama is and the pure self-interest of the United States of America.  You’re a powerful symbol of Panama’s success, Mr. President, and it’s a reminder that our futures, the United States and Panama and this hemisphere, are inextricably linked. 
Your work on this Canal strengthens my country.  We owe you.  We thank you.  May God bless you all.  And may God protect our troops.  Thank you all very much.  (Applause.)      
END               
4:35 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 September 20, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden and Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto
Los Pinos
Mexico City, Mexico
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:   Well, Mr. President, thank you for your hospitality and for the opportunity to meet your young daughter.  That was worth the trip.
On my last visit with you, Mr. President, was the day you were being inaugurated.  And it's good to see you again and see you in such good form. 
As I said earlier today at the high economic dialogue that the ties between our country rest on a unique foundation -- a common culture, common values, and common dreams in addition to a long common border.  Increasingly, those relationships will also be built on a common pursuit of economic opportunity.  The dreams of an average Mexican are no different than the dreams of an average American, an average citizen of the United States.  And we both are committed to seeing them be able to realize those dreams.
Mr. President, you and I have continued our conversation on security.  But we also agree that no part of our relationship is more important than expanding economic opportunity to improve the lives of our citizens.  That's why I came to Mexico City today to launch the first ever U.S.-Mexican High Level Economic Dialogue.  And that's why I brought with me four United States Cabinet members, secretaries of our Cabinet.
I joked earlier at the dialogue that Air Force Two is not big enough to have taken all the Cabinet members who wanted to come.  But it's evidence of the fact that as I said, I started coming to Mexico in the early '70s as a young United States senator.  And I can't tell you how pleased I am that we are no longer just talking about explicit, specific security relationships.  We're talking about a much broader, broader relationship, a full relationship.
As President Obama said, Mexico is emerging.  But you are more than emerging.  You have emerged.  The middle class in Mexico is more than 40 million.  You have a growing voice on the global international stage.  A serious agenda of reform and modernization that you have taken on, Mr. President, is impressive.  And all this creates new opportunities to deepen our economic partnerships in ways that benefit both our citizens. 
Mr. President, you and I spoke about the steps that we can take to modernize our border, including new technologies in the extended hours at some crossings.  We spoke about education, the building block of any middle-class society.  Both our countries have embarked on serious reforms.  There's a great deal we can do together as well.
We do not suggest that we have all the answers.  We need much improvement in our education system in our own country as well.  But we do have the finest higher education system in the world, including a unique expertise that we've developed in community colleges.  And we hope that if you so desire, we could be of some assistance in benefitting from our experience.
The President and I also discussed reform efforts underway in both our countries.  Change is never easy.  But the policies President Obama and our administration have pursued in the United States have helped business create 7.5 million new jobs since we've taken office.  Mexico is undertaking its own reforms. 
Mr. President, you have reached across party lines to mobilize a broad constituency to take on these difficult, but important steps.  And these decisions belong totally to the people of Mexico.  But we stand ready if asked to be of any assistance we can be.  And we look forward to the continued growth of Mexico, because it's overwhelmingly in the best interest of the United States of America that that happen.
Twenty years ago, NAFTA set a new standard for global trade.  The 21st century, though, demands even higher standards than those standards set 20 years ago.  Open markets, competition, increasing economic transparency around the world to make it easier to do business anywhere in the world, and protecting labor and the environment and intellectual property -- these are the emerging standards of the 21st century that will determine the economic growth of all the countries who participate or choose not to participate. 
The President and I also spoke about how we can enforce and expand these 21st century rules of the world within our own hemisphere, across the Pacific, and around the world to help Mexico and the United States and our companies compete on a level playing field.  President Obama and President Peña Nieto and I, we are in full agreement in that there is no reason why North America cannot be the most prosperous and the most economically viable place in the world in the 21st century.
We also spoke about the comprehensive immigration reform that’s underway in our country.  I want to make it clear it's not just a matter of justice, respect and dignity that is owed to the 11 million undocumented men, women and children in our country; that they be brought out of the shadows and have a clear path to citizenship and participation.  But it's also in the overwhelming economic interest of both our countries that we do this.  As the Congressional Budget Office pointed out in a bipartisan study, when we do this, when we modernize our immigration system, it will have over a $1.3 trillion positive impact on our economy between now and the year 2023, over the next 20 years. 
And so we discussed a lot of other issues as well, but the one thing that I made clear on behalf of President Obama -- there is no relationship that we value more, there is no economic relationship we think that holds more promise, and there is no part of the world that has the opportunity to do as much, to generate economic growth over the next 20 to 30 years than in this hemisphere -- in North America in particular.  It's a more important partnership than we have in many places, and it deserves to be.  There's a deep and abiding friendship between our nations, and I look forward to playing a small part in continuing to help build that relationship.
And finally, let me say that I know many in Mexico are suffering today.  As the President pointed out, the reason he has cancelled his trip to the United Nations is because he has a strong need and desire to be here to deal with that crisis.  He also pointed out that the natural disasters we're facing around the world today seem to be broader and more expansive than they have been in the past.  That’s clearly the case here in Mexico.
But I also shared with the President that I'll be leaving here and on the end of the weekend going to my own country, to Colorado, the state of Colorado, where an area larger than our state of Connecticut has been devastated -- the entire transportation system, the roads, buildings -- well over a billion dollars' worth of damage calculated so far.
And so -- but not withstanding that, we both offered each other any help and assistance we can be.  The United States stands ready to be of any assistance we can as you deal with this natural disaster and the plight of your people, Mr. President. 
And again, let me conclude by saying what an honor it is to be back, and what a personal high regard the President and I have for you and your leadership.  We're lucky to have you as a partner.  Thank you. 
PRESIDENT PEÑA NIETO:  (As interpreted.)  Thank you very much, Mr. Vice President of the United States of America, Joseph Biden. 
First and foremost, let me welcome you to our country.  It is a pleasure to have you here once again.  This is the third time that we both meet in the last months.  I would like to welcome as well and greet your entourage, and the U.S. ambassador to Mexico.  I’m very grateful to share this moment with the members of the media, and the agenda that we will work on that we have agreed upon together. 
First of all, I would like to recognize the solidarity shown by your country to ours due the climate events that we are facing.  And regretfully we have had casualties and damages that Mexican families suffer, as well our infrastructure has suffered.  And in the same fashion, I would like to express our solidarity as a country towards yours for all the damages that have been caused to American families, specifically in the state of Colorado, as you have noted. 
There is no doubt that the effects of climate events serve as another reason to unite in a front built on cooperation and solidarity which are elements that represent the relationship between the U.S. and Mexico. 
Vice President Biden’s visit has a reason, and he is joined by members of the Cabinet of President Obama’s administration -- are here for a reason, for the first High Level Economic Dialogue chaired by Vice President Biden. 
It is part of the set of agreements made during President Obama’s visit back in May.  Hereupon, we have decided to set off a certain level of dialogue between our countries so that we can explore and take advantage of opportunity windows to broaden and strengthen the relationship between Mexico and the United States.  And in result, we will get further benefit and further integration between our nations.
And it is aimed to make the North American region, as Vice President Biden has put it, a more productive, a more competitive one -- a region that in the 21st century offers more job and development opportunities for the citizens of our nations; and to make a region -- to make North America the powerhouse of global economy.  That is why we’re building a strategic partnership, and that is why I am pleased that the agreement made by myself and President Obama in result made Vice President of the United States the chair of this high level group to begin with this economic dialogue and to address certain topics as the ones that were addressed this morning that will be useful to work on infrastructure projects in our countries and in the region specifically along the border.  And by that we will have a more agile and safe crossing of individuals on our border.
Currently, between our countries, 1 million individuals cross our borders.  It is the busiest border in the world.  And along this border we have commodities and products that are traded between our nations.  That is why we have decided to open up this space for dialogue to exchange other issues.  We already have cooperation in the areas of security, but as well in the area of the economy.  We have a free trade agreement that sets the ground for that.  But in order to supplement that agreement we’re going to work together in the TPP.  And that would make what we have already an important platform for economic integration with the Asian countries and North America.
This morning, a group of presidents of universities from both countries as well met with a purpose to broaden student and faculty exchanges.  And we have set up a very feasible goal that is yet ambitious that in the upcoming years at least 100,000 students from Mexico can visit the United States through an educational program and 50,000 Americans can come to our country to study.  This is one of the goals that this bilateral forum on higher education, innovation and research has decided.
And within the framework of the high level dialogue we have set out specific goals, as I have noted.  What I have noted clearly defines the vision that our governments have and our countries.  We have agreed to make our relationship one that is based in friendship, in fraternity, and trust.  And together, we will be able to broaden our collaboration horizons in order to make our countries more integrated countries and provide more opportunities to our citizens.
This is the shared vision that our governments, our countries have.  And this is the vision that we're working towards too.  The U.S.-Mexico relationship, Mexico-U.S. relationship cannot be only based on specific topics.  It should be a diverse, a broad relationship, as broad as creativity and the will of government and the private sector as well.  And that is why we have been able to consolidate the level of relationship that we have. 
President Biden's visit to Mexico confirms this shared vision, confirms the interest that both of our countries have to make our relationship -- I must insist -- a relationship that makes North America’s region a stronger, a more consolidated region.  And we can truly be a powerhouse of development in the 21st century.  This is our understanding.  This is what we have agreed upon.  And we have already begun all the relevant activities needed to explore and venture into new cooperation, exchange and integration avenues to strengthen our relationship.
I must recognize the delegation joining the Vice President of the United States -- Secretary of Trade, Secretary of Transportation, who currently is -- also, the acting Secretary of the Department of the Interior, and also the Secretary of Trade and others who are part of President Obama's Cabinet are joining the Vice President.  These are high-ranking officials, and this is a sign of the agreements made and the level of interest.  I must insist both of our administrations have to make this relationship one that would provide benefit for our peoples.
Once again, Mr. Vice President, welcome to our country, and we hope that you have had a very fruitful and positive stay for the benefit of both of our countries.  And please, be certain that you are at home.  This is our wish, and we also wish the members of your delegation to feel at home. 
And once again, let me tell you that it is a pleasure and an honor to have you here -- has been an honor to meet with you.  And to define the prosperous relationship that we're going to work towards to for the benefit of our nations, because we have a true friendship and we trust each other, and that’s what we're building upon.
Thank you, Mr. Vice President.  Welcome.  (Applause.)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 20, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the U.S.-Mexico High Level Economic Dialogue
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mexico City, Mexico
10:24 A.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Well, Mr. Minister, Foreign Minister, Finance Minister, thank you very, very much.  It’s a delight to be back in Mexico.  I’ve been in public life for a long time, as you can tell.  (Laughter.)  And my first visits to Mexico occurred in the early ‘70s, as a young Senator.  And as you were both speaking, I was thinking about the significant contrast with the meeting we’re having today, and all the meetings I have had in the ‘70s and the ‘80s and the ‘90s.  Almost all of them were uni-dimensional; they were always about a single subject -- mostly, about security issues, mostly about drugs, mostly about immigration.  But finally, finally, we have reached the point where we should have reached a long time ago, I think.  It began -- beginning with NAFTA 20-some years -- 20 years ago, where we’re looking at the relationship as partners in a wholesome -- way -- and I mean that in a literal sense -- all of the relationship:  the cultural, political, economic, security, as mature partners do.  And on behalf of the President, I am delighted to be here.
 
President Peña Nieto, who I’ve gotten to know -- I don’t want to exaggerate it, but gotten to know a little bit -- I have personal admiration for him.  And I think, as the Foreign Minister said -- I think it was the Foreign Minister who said, that your President said that there’s no reason why North America cannot be the most dynamic area in the world.  We share that view, right to our -- the marrow of our bones.
 
As a matter of fact, the President asked me at the beginning of this new administration, to take an even broader look and to look at the hemisphere.  For the first time in all of our lives, looking at the entire Western Hemisphere, it is possible to envision a hemisphere that is middle class, democratic and secure.  It’s not there yet, but it is possible to envision that.  From Canada to the tip of Argentina, there is no reason why in the 21st century the hemisphere will not be the most potent economic engine in the world. 
 
But that won’t happen without Mexico, and that won’t happen without this North American engine gaining more power, more steam and more capacity. 
 
I want to begin by recognizing the incredible work of your excellent delegation.  A lot of work has gone into this meeting.  And I want to thank all of you on my team who have made the journey here with me.  As a matter of fact, I was worried there weren’t going to be enough seats on the plane, so many people wanted to come.  (Laughter.)  You think I’m kidding; I am not kidding.  (Laughter.)  Every Cabinet member wanted to participate in this, because they see the potential.
 
I always joke at home when they say, define America for me, meaning the United States.  And I say it’s about one thing:  It’s about promise.  It’s about the future.  It’s always looking at the future.  You’re in the same position.  You can see it.  You can almost taste it, can’t you?  A new day, a new time coming forward -- not because of the United States, but from Mexico.
 
And so I’ve come at a moment when I have personally, at the request of the President, been focused heavily on the Middle East and on Syria and the events that are taking place in the region.  But the President made it clear to me, and it was like, as they say, pushing on an open door, that no matter what was occupying us immediately, that it was important to be here.  So I want to make it clear to you that President Obama is deeply invested in the maturation of this relationship at every level -- at every level.  This is a different day.  This is a different day.
 
And so -- but I wanted to be here with you because my country’s foreign policy is about more than dealing with threats, as we are dealing with in the Middle East.  It’s also about partnerships -- partnerships that we believe, the President and I, are literally going to shape the future for my country for the next 10, 20, 30, 40 years.  And there is no reason -- there is absolutely no reason in my view -- some of you know I’ve held this view for some time, but I think everyone thinks it now -- there is no reason why our partnership, the U.S.-Mexico partnership, should not be among the strongest that we have.  We are grounded in a common border, a common culture, common values, common dreams and common potential. 
 
So it’s truly my honor to be here as part of this first-ever U.S.-Mexico High Level Economic Dialogue.  As I said, it’s nice to be talking about things beyond the narrow things we’ve focused on talking about the past 20 years, although we have talked about the economy.  This is a different time. 
 
It’s been nearly two decades since the United States and Mexico tore down the barriers between our economies, and since then, as has been pointed out, there has been -- we have quadrupled our rate of exchange -- as your Minister of the Treasury said, a million dollars per minute, a billion dollars a day.  There is no question our economic partnership has been a success.  But there is also no question that there’s much, much, much, much more potential.  And I would add, there’s also no question lest we seize the opportunity, it may pass us by because the world is moving rapidly. 
 
The rise of the Mexican middle class, more than 40 million, has not only bettered the lives of the Mexican people but it has created incredible opportunities inside of Mexico and outside of Mexico.  A generation ago, there weren’t as many customers, investors, trading partners.  This has a synergy, as you mentioned, of its own.  As the living standard, as wages increase here, the whole world benefits.  We benefit.  We used to think in terms of zero-sum games around the world:  If that country’s GDP rises and ours -- it’s a different time. 
 
A strong, integrated North American economy, grounded on the respect and 21st-century rules of the road, is going to attract investment and make us both better in the global economy.  You’ve already seen it.  What do you see happening?  Manufacturing is coming back to North America.  It’s coming back after having left us, then left you, and headed to China, and headed for the Far East.  It’s coming back.  Why?  Why?  Because of the incredible potential.  Also because we have a system that makes it more sustainable for folks to be here than there.  It’s created jobs from Puebla to Pittsburgh.  And I mean that literally.  It’s not just the major cities.  This global economy is changing fast and we need to keep up.
 
And I know it’s a delicate subject, but NAFTA set a new standard for global trade, but that was 20 years ago -- 20 years ago.  We all know the 21st century demands even higher standards to meet the full potential of world trade.  Countries around the world are already adapting, already moving, opening industries that have been closed in order to strengthen competition and bring better delivery to their own citizens; removing barriers that function as disguised trade barriers in order to generate their own indigenous growth; working to increase economic transparency to root out corruption and improve business confidence; expanding protections for the environment and labor and intellectual property.
 
I hope we’re beyond those arguments about whether or not the environment matters, whether minimum standards are important.  I think we are, at least most of the world is.  And that’s what it takes to compete.  In the new global economy that’s emerging, the price of admission to participate is to play by these new rules.  And we each make our own national judgment about what is necessary to realize the economic potential of our own countries. 
 
I’m supposedly a foreign policy expert, but I speak very plainly.  It’s a real simple thing:  I never ask another man or woman to act against their own interest; I never tell another country what’s in their interest.  I determine what’s in my country’s interest and try to identify where there’s a mutual interest.  So it’s Mexico’s decision and every country’s decision how they adapt, if they adapt, to these new rules. 
 
But we’re here because both our Presidents and I agree that it’s fundamentally in our mutual interest to broaden and deepen our economic relationship.  And that means we cannot settle for business as usual.  And so the President -- at President Obama’s direction, every federal agency here today has taken part in a thorough preparation so that we could begin to get down to the details.  What are the impediments?  What is the sand in the gears to keep this from working better?  We all know there are sand in the gears.  We also know any change affects stakeholders, not all the same way.  Change is hard.  But we have to be ready to deliver results if we’re going to move to this next phase.
 
I know your side has done the same exact thing.  Together we have a chance to make progress on modernizing our border, linking our aviation sectors, increasing economic transparency.  If you have been in a space capsule, sent to Mars and been away for the last 50 years, and you’re coming back and they’re bringing you up to date on everything on a big screen of what’s happened in the recent past, and where you are, and you take a look at the United States, Mexico and Canada, you’d sit there and say, “Why?  Why isn’t there even more cooperation?  It’s just so natural geographically, politically, economically. 
 
Our ability to do what we have to do is going to tell us an awful lot about the broader partnership that I think both our countries seek.  So let me talk briefly about some of the work ahead, and I’ll be brief.
 
First, we need to make it more efficient for goods, people, and information to move across our borders.  Security is important, but we have to have as the goal the ability to move faster and more goods, people, and information across our borders, while improving security as is pointed out.
 
Our border is the site of more than -- as I said as pointed out a billion dollars a day in trade.  But is there any reason why -- is there any one of you businessmen or women in here can't rationally picture 10 years from now that being $2 billion?  But it won’t if we don't make some of the changes that are going to be difficult.
 
On our side that's going to require extending, for example -- to move more rapidly across the border extending business hours at border crossings, basic simple things.  For Mexico it’s going to demand greater effort to connect our roads, our rails, our infrastructure.  It just makes no sense that we don't.  Both of us can do more to modernize investment through a stronger North American Development Bank.
 
And beyond our border, with a simple agreement, we can make it more affordable to fly between every single city and every single town in your state -- I mean in your country and my country.  Why is that so difficult? 
 
Second, there are steps where each of us can take to drive growth and innovation on both sides of the border.  We are convinced that innovation flourishes where people can breathe free air as they do in Mexico and America, where they have a court system that's free of corruption and adjudicates disputes fairly, where intellectual property is protected.  That's the new minimum standard.  You businessmen and women know what’s going to happen is the free enterprise system is going to drive business to those locales where that prevails.  It’s just basic.
 
And by the way, it’s in the overall self-interest of a country to establish that, otherwise indigenous innovation is not likely to prosper.  That's why -- that's the way you create homegrown, innovative capacity.  But we also know innovation can't flourish in the absence of education.
 
Both our Presidents are passionate about this issue, and apparently some of your citizens are passionate about this issue.  (Laughter.)  I thought they all gathered to welcome me to Mexico City.  (Laughter.)  I was quite frankly somewhat disappointed when I found out that 15 or so thousand people weren’t there hollering “Biden, Biden.”  (Laughter.)  But all kidding aside, it stirs passions as you well know.
 
But both our systems need improving.  And I’m not here to lecture you.  I’m not here to say, well, the United States system is one you should -- we have a lot of improvement ourselves to make.  My wife is I think -- maybe not -- I think the first time the first Second Lady or First Lady to teach full time.  She teaches 15 credits, and she has for years, at a community college in Northern Virginia.  She has a great expression.  She says, “Any country, Joe, that out-educates us will out-compete us.” 
 
The new currency is cognitive capability.  That's the new currency.  We are told and we know six out of 10 jobs in the next 10 years in America will require something beyond a high school education -- six out of 10.  We have 600,000 high-tech manufacturing jobs going unfilled in America today because of the lack of a skilled workforce on the specific needs that exist whether it’s -- whatever it is.  And we’ve figured out a way to adapt our community colleges.  It’s cheaper.  It’s more expedient.  And it’s the single, best-kept secret in America.  We’d like to share it with you if you’re interested.  I mean it sincerely.
 
Every country I go to it’s the same for Mexico as the United States, we in the United States don't, as I said, have all the answers.  But we do -- and this is somewhat chauvinistic and I apologize for it, but you're used to chauvinistic Americans.  (Laughter.)  But I think most of the world would acknowledge only one thing about our education system.  We have the finest university system in the world.  And you have too many, but you have -- UNAM and Monterrey Tech are as good as Harvard or University of Pennsylvania or Yale.  But one of the things we all try to do as economic growth focused on, and particularly as we’re building middle class is countries tend to say, let’s go out and build more Monterrey Techs or more Universities of Pennsylvania.  That takes decades.  That takes decades.  And not everyone will qualify.
 
There’s a vast majority of capable people out there who in this new high-tech economy can be given all the tools for less investment and more focus in our view.  But that's for you to decide.
 
The fastest way to prepare a citizen for a job of the 21st century in our experience is through the community college system.  And as I said, we have some unique experience in this.
 
We also want to welcome, as was pointed out, more Mexican students to the United States and more United States students to Mexico.  That's why we committed to doubling the number of students by 2020, doubling the number of U.S. students -- doubling it both ways through our 100,000 Strong Initiative.  You all know it matters.  Some of you were educated in the United States.  Some Americans, not as many, educated here in Mexico.  It has a -- it creates a sinew, a tissue that goes beyond just the education in terms of understanding one another as well.
 
We look forward to launching this Bilateral Forum on Education to get much more done together.  And we have much to learn from you as well.
 
Domestically, the President and I when we announced our candidacy back in 2008 were very straightforward.  We think the measure of our success and the measure of the growth and the strength of the American economy will rest upon on whether or not the middle class is once again growing.
 
We’re proud to say we have -- major industrialized -- has the largest middle class in the world.  That is the heart, strength, and backbone of our country.  So we have focused on -- they took a real beating over the last 15 years in America, particularly during the recession.  So we’re focusing on the building blocks like you:  a health care system that's universal and it’s affordable; a safe and responsible -- universal education that's quality and affordable where everyone has access to go as far as their intellectually capable of going, not just based on what neighborhood they grew up on.
 
We want responsible exploration of significant new energy supplies, including the United States we now have -- just as a matter of good fortune, 100 years of reserve of natural gas.  We’re figuring out how to tap it and tap it in an environmentally safe way.
 
And an infrastructure that's the most modern in the world -- both of us have to compete.  Go around the world, as many of you have.  I’ve traveled over 750,000 just in the last four years.  If I took some folks from Mexico City or New York City and I dropped them in the Port of Hong Kong and they took a look at it, say, where is this?  They’d assume it’s in the United States -- Americans would.  It’s not.  Take them to an airport in Beijing.  They’d assume it’s in the United States, the Americans.  But it’s not.  We need a 21st century infrastructure, particularly along our border -- particularly along our border.
 
And a finance system that is flourishing but also is accountable.  We both know reform is hard.  Believe me we know reform is hard.  We have entrenched interests -- and they're not bad folks.  They're good folks.  But there are always winners and losers when the rules of the road change.  Even when those rules better the interest of the country, you’re changing the rules.  And it’s hard.  But as difficult as it’s been, some of the changes the President and I have been able to make are beginning to bear fruit.  We have much more to do, but they’ve helped our businesses create 7.5 million new jobs in the past four years.
 
Mexico too has embraced historic changes.  You’re reforming your telecommunications, education, and even your energy sector.  These decisions belong -- and I want to make it clear to the press -- these decisions belong exclusively and only to the people of Mexico, not the people of the United States.  But we wish you well in those reforms.  Because as an outsider looking in, they're all needed.  They're all needed in order to equip you, and in turn, selfishly benefit us as you move down to establish a new role in the 21st century.  Because as you choose, we stand ready to help you realize those benefits in any way we can. 
 
With regard to immigration, let me make two things absolutely clear.  It is not only from the perspective of the President, myself and the American people a matter of justice, respect, and according dignity to all people to bring 11 million undocumented men, women, and children out of the shadows, but it’s also overwhelmingly in the self-interest, the economic self-interest of the United States. 
 
The Congressional Budget Office, which is sort of our gold standard that is truly nonpartisan, in a study released in June, estimates that comprehensive immigration reform will grow the U.S. economy by $1.4 trillion by the year 2033.  It will facilitate travel in business and workers, and it will bring economic security to families with members on both side of the border regardless of which side they call home.
 
The third thing I’d like to point out is our two economies should look outward together.  The United States and Canada have created a -- the United States, Canada, and Mexico have created a trillion-dollar trade relationship.  Imagine what we can accomplish if we extend that economic cooperation, as I said, south.  And that's why Mexico, through your leadership, the Alliance of the Pacific, is integrating stock markets and customs unions with Peru, Chile and Columbia.
 
Mexico is also investing Central America, and we want to be partners with you in that to the extent you want us.  We’re already working together to connect North America and some of the southern neighbors with economies in Asia through the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  I just got back from visiting the Pacific Rim.  They understand.  They understand that there’s nothing local anymore.
 
That's why when I meet with your President, that's why when I meet with the President of Colombia, the President of Chile they all understand the future is there.  There.
 
When this is finished -- and we believe it will be -- 40 percent of the entire global economy will be signed on to a single, new gold standard for 21st century trade agreements.
 
And finally, both our countries have suffered greatly from natural disasters.  Our prayers are with the victims of the devastating floods and storms that ravage your country right now.  And we stand ready.  It's your decision.  We stand ready to help in any way we can.  As a matter of fact, I'm leaving from here and I'm going to Colorado, an area the size of the state of Connecticut has been devastated in the state of Colorado.  The estimates are well over $1.2 billion in damage thus far.  There are hundreds of people still missing and many have died.
 
So we understand.  We understand, but that doesn't mean we still can't help, if you want us too.  That doesn't mean we still can't help.  We contributed a quarter million dollars to the Red Cross effort down here, but that's a decision for you to make if you -- whatever else we can do, because it's a common concern.  In a sense, we are a single people. 
 
What benefits Mexico and the people of Mexico ultimately has a resounding benefit in the United States.  And so we want to be part of a partnership where you grow, where you prosper and when you seek your place in the international community as one of the most vibrant economies in the world.
 
The work of updating that partnership like ours is not easy.  We're going to need the help of all you businessmen and women in this room of civil society and citizens on both sides to make it happen, in addition to our governments, in addition to our governments
 
There's an old -- and I'll conclude -- there's an old story about a group of activists who made their case for some reform to Franklin -- President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  And he told them, and I quote, “You have convinced me, now make me do it.”  (Laughter.)  “You have convinced me, now make me do it.” 
 
So I say to those of you here from outside of government, we have been convinced of your message, now make us do it.  Make us do it.  Hard-working people in both our countries are building our economic partnerships from the ground up every single solitary day.  And our job is to take the difficult steps that make their job easier, just a little bit easier.  I know we can, and I'm absolutely confident we will.
 
So let me close by saying, once again, it's great to be here in Mexico, this time talking about the entirety of our relationship and the awesome potential and promise it has if we have the courage, the political courage to take what in retrospect will look like easy, but presently look like some very difficult steps to break down barriers and to set a new set of rules of the road. 
 
So thank you all.  May God bless you and may God protect all those people who are still being ravaged and left out in the cold because of the storm.  Thank you all very much.  I look forward to seeing you again.  (Applause.)
END
10:50 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 July 26, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Biden and Prime Minister Lee of Singapore
Istana
Singapore
**Please see below for a correction to the transcript, marked with an asterisk.
3:45 P.M. SGT
PRIME MINISTER LEE:  Ladies and gentlemen, is it my great pleasure to welcome Vice President Biden to Singapore. 
I was -- met him last in the White House in April (inaudible) together with President Obama, and I’m delighted to reciprocate Vice President Biden’s very kind hospitality.  I hope you enjoy the visit and I hope that Mrs. Biden likes the orchid that we made up. 
Our relations with the U.S. are wide-ranging and in excellent shape.  Many U.S. institutions, colleges like Yale University, Duke Medical School or Johns Hopkins Peabody Institute are partnering with Singapore universities.  And American companies are here too in big numbers, like Pratt & Whitney, which the Vice President is visiting.  And they have contributed much to our economy and they are continuing to invest and to upgrade their operations.
We are also pleased to have a very good security relationship and defense relationship with the U.S.  And we’re hosting the first U.S. LCS littoral combat ship in Singapore, which arrived in April to conduct exercises together with navies in the region.
So in our discussions just now, the Vice President and I agreed to explore new partnerships in R&D, in culture and in education.  We are (inaudible) very happy that the U.S. is engaged in the region, Asia Pacific, and particularly, of course, in Southeast Asia and ASEAN, our partners as well -- and on a global front, through security cooperation, trade, education, energy and so on.
Singapore is friends with America, also with India, Japan and China and the other major powers.  And we would like to maintain our good relations with all of them.  And we’ve always believed that the U.S. has a constructive role to play in the region, and the Vice President has played a significant role being responsible for these efforts in this administration, and especially in maintaining and strengthening (inaudible) between U.S. and China. 
One of the manifestations of America’s engagement in the region is the TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  Singapore played a modest role getting this going because we were one of the founding members in the P4, together with Brunei, with Chile and New Zealand.  And the TPP is built around the blueprints of the P4. 
We support Japan’s participation in the TPP.  And I met Prime Minister Abe earlier this morning.  And we are very happy that with Japan’s and with the United States’ and the other countries’ support, the TPP is as strategically and needed-for step forward towards free trade in the Asia Pacific.
So we look forward to continuing our conversation with the United States and (inaudible) our cooperation.  And I wish the Vice President a very successful visit, and I look forward to carrying on the conversation with him over dinner tonight.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.  Thank you for your hospitality. 
Let me begin by echoing comments that the Prime Minister said.  The United States also is friends with India, China and Japan.  We have a positive relationship with all and a strong strategic relationship with Japan.
I want to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for continuation of what was a wide-ranging and delightful conversation that we started in the United States.  And we discussed many issues of interest to the United States and Singapore, and we stand shoulder-to-shoulder on the vast majority of the issues that we jointly face.
I’ve come to Singapore at the request of President Obama to underscore our commitment to our rebalance in the Asia Pacific, and particularly to Southeast Asia, and to our bilateral relationship with Singapore.
Ours is a growing partnership, and it’s also a partnership of growing purpose.  Singapore sits equidistant from Beijing and New Delhi, at the center of the region’s east, west and north, south trade routes.  Singapore’s port is the world’s largest trans-shipping hub.  ASEAN now represents $2 trillion of economy, and 600 million people, and Singapore is its economic (inaudible).
And so, Mr. Prime Minister, as we discussed, there’s enormous pride -- there’s enormous promise in our economic cooperation for our two countries and I would respectfully suggest the entire region.  It’s remarkable that Singapore, a country of 5 million people, now has a $50 billion trading relationship with the United States.*  And that you are our 17th largest trading partner, ahead of Russia and other much larger countries.
Your economic success is testament to the people and the leaders of Singapore, and it is -- I have the great honor of being able to meet your father shortly, one of the most admired men in the world, one of the reasons why you are where you are -- not you personally, but your country.
And also Singapore is also -- as (inaudible) economic (inaudible) we share in 21st century:  fewer barriers at and behind our borders; protections of intellectual property and rewards for innovation; rules governing congress that are transparent -- excuse me, governing commerce that are transparent and clearly defined; high standards and a new commitment to treat companies fairly whether they are foreign or domestic, state-owned or private.
These are the core ingredients of 21st century growth in our opinion, and they're major reasons why businesses flock to Singapore. 
And I also (inaudible) to the Trans-Pacific Partnership our countries have been negotiating in Malaysia in these past few weeks.  This agreement will connect Singapore and the United States with Pacific economies as diverse as Vietnam, Chile, New Zealand, Mexico and now Japan. 
We welcome Japan negotiating this week, and now the 12 countries at the negotiating table account for 40 percent -- 40 percent -- of the world’s GDP.  The TPP nations represent a core constituency for stronger, global economic rules of the road for the 21st century.  That's at the core of what you’re about.
These -- this agreement is ambitious, and it should be.  But it’s also -- the TPP, it’s not only ambitious, it’s doable.  And we’re working hard with Singapore and others to get it done in 2013. 
Prime Minister Lee and I also spoke about our regional security.  We each expressed our concerns about rising tensions in the South China Sea.  All the parties have a common interest in the freedom of navigation and peaceful resolution of territorial disputes.  The United States urges all parties to reject coercion, intimidation, threats and the use of force.  We encourage the ASEAN and China to quickly reach agreement on a code of conduct. 
We were encouraged by the agreements that started discussions in the code of conduct, and we hope to see them follow through in the upcoming weeks. 
We also discussed the need to deepen our counterproliferation, law enforcement cooperation to address emerging threat and maintain the momentum in our military-to-military relationship, which is strong and effective.
I look forward tomorrow to visiting the USS Fitzgerald and a littoral combat ship, the USS Freedom, which is evidence of the nature of that strong relationship.
The Freedom is currently rotationally deployed here in Singapore, a powerful symbol of our shared commitment to stability, security and freedom of navigation in (inaudible).
And finally we discussed (inaudible) greater rights that people across the region are seeking. 
So let me then close by thanking the people of Singapore for their incredible hospitality.  Mr. Prime Minister, never did I think in my wildest dreams that I would have an orchid named after me and my wife in Singapore.  (Laughter.)  That was beyond any expectation I ever had as a child or as an adult, but it’s truly a great honor.  (Laughter.)
And so it’s a tremendous honor to be with you again, Mr. Prime Minister, and I thank you for this gesture and for the terrific discussion.  Thank you.
END
3:55 P.M. SGT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 24, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on the U.S.-India Partnership at the Bombay Stock Exchange
The Bombay Stock Exchange
Mumbai, India
1:40 P.M. IST
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much, Kaku.  I appreciate it. 
Thank you all for giving me this opportunity.  It’s an honor to be back in India and to be here in Mumbai.  Off script for a second here, I was reminded -- I was elected to the United States Senate when I was a 29-year-old kid back in 1972, and one of the first letters I received and I regret I never followed up on it.  Maybe some genealogist in audience can follow up for me, but I received a letter from a gentleman named Biden -- Biden, my name -- from Mumbai, asserting that we were related.  (Laughter.)  Seriously.  Suggesting that our mutual, great, great, great, something or other worked for the East India Trading Company back in the 1700s and came to Mumbai.
And so I was thinking about it, if that's true, I might run here in India for office.  (Laughter.)  I might be qualified.  But I’ve never followed up on it.  But now that I’m back for the multiple times, I’m going to follow up to find out whether there is a Biden and whether we’re related.  I hope he’s in good standing if we are.  (Laughter.)
I want to thank you for the kind welcome, Kaku, and the nice introduction.  I’m delighted to be in Mumbai, a city full of history and dreams and incredible energy.  I bring with me the admiration of the American people and the good wishes of President Obama.
We admire the way you’ve melded ethnicities, faiths and tongues into a single, proud nation; the way entrepreneurship seems almost hard-wired into Indian society, from rickshaw wallas to web programmers; and maybe most of all, we admire your democracy and the message that your democracy sends to people everywhere in the world.  And that message is:  No nation need choose between development and freedom.   They are not inconsistent.
America is a land of immigrants, as we tell ourselves all the time and are reminded in every generation.  And America has been strengthened by the diverse cultures of India woven into the fabric of most of our communities, including those of you who are Americans my own the small community in the state of Delaware that I represented in the United States Senate. 
Any weekend in Delaware -- we have a very significant and tight Indian-American community -- any weekend in Delaware, you can find the Delaware United Cricket Club competing.  And now I have bragging rights.  I will be able to go back and tell my friends who belong to that club that I visited the home of the best cricket team in the world.  It will give me some reason to -- (applause).  You won the International Cricket Council Championship.
And as an Irish American, it pleased my heart to see you beat Britain, England.  (Laughter.)  That's a joke, by the way, for the press.  (Laughter.)  I don't want to hear a headline:  Biden at Odds with British Empire, you know?  (Laughter.)  But it does make me feel good.  (Laughter.)
India has made a very impressive journey to state the obvious.  Twenty-two years ago, you took bold steps to start opening your economy.  And the results were almost immediate, and they were remarkable.  Over the past decade, you have lifted 160 million people into the middle class.  In 1991, India had 5 million total phone lines; now you have 900 million.  In 1991, you exported $20 billion in goods each year.  Now that's over $300 billion.   India is no longer an economic island -- and a rising, rising economic power.
Of course, obstacles remain as in our country and every country.  But here in India growth has slowed. Poverty persists.  And there are significant challenges in the region and the world in which you reside.
But we’re confident, presumptuous of us to say this, but we Americans are confident that India will continue to rise because we believe you will make the -- take the additional steps necessary to spur further growth and enhance your economic influence around the world, and in the process lift the whole world.  We want to be your partner in that venture, in lifting the economy of the world.
And since we’re at a former stock exchange, let me humbly suggest that America is back, and it’s has never been a good bet to bet against America –- never been a good bet to bet against America.
We’ve had the biggest increase in domestic manufacturing in the past 20 years; 40 months of private sector job growth -- we need more and more rapidly, but constant growth.  We are now the recipients and we have access to and know how to safely extract over 100 years of natural gas reserves, driving the price of energy down to the -- in the United States to make us among the most competitive nations in the world for manufacturing. 
In addition to that, we will be a net energy exporter.  We will be energy independent during the ‘20s -- the decade of the ‘20s, 2020.
The foundations of our economy are stronger than ever.  The best research universities in the world –- you have great ones, we have the most -- and the most vibrant startups; a culture of innovation and openness.
For all the problems of our education system, and every country has it, and we have our own, particularly in elementary education, the one thing that is constant in America from the time a child steps into any classroom from kindergarten to first grade, they are taught that it is okay to question orthodoxy, to challenge the status quo.
So I believe that each of our economies will continue to grow and in the process help shape the course of the century ahead, the 21st century.
If you excuse me quoting an Irishman, but a fellow named William Butler Yeats, my favorite poet, writing a poem about his Ireland in the year 1916, called Easter Sunday 1916, something Indians and Irishmen hold in common, trying to rise with the British.  It was the first rebellion in Ireland in the 20th century.  And he wrote that poem called Easter Sunday 1916.  And in that poem there’s a line that he attempted to describe his Ireland at the time, but I would argue it better describes the state of the world as we find it today.
He said, all’s changed; changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.  All’s changed, changed utterly.  The world has changed utterly just since I entered public life, and matter of fact, in the last 20 years.  And there’s a need for new rules of the road -- both strategically and economically.
But I would ask you -– I would ask you, as we continue to grow separately -- I would ask you to consider the historic opportunity that is in front of us.  Imagine what our two countries can achieve together in this 21st century -- not only for one another but for economic stability of the region, as well as the world.
It seems to me there are certain basic principles in the way forward that are clear: a trade and investment partnership that is open and fair; that grows both our economies as India builds the largest middle class in human history; a security partnership of first resort where we look instinctively to each other to help the Asia-Pacific region to rise -- continue to peacefully; closer ties than ever between our citizens, universities, civil societies and businesses; a partnership defined not by what it promises, but defined by what it delivers. 
We’ve made headway.  We’ve launched an annual dialogue between our governments that covers everything from counterterrorism to higher education.  As a matter of fact at a dinner hosted by the Vice President last night, very generous of him, we were talking in great detail granularly about community colleges and what future they hold for here in India.  My wife is full-time community college professor, has been teaching -- I can't say the number of years now because it reveals her age, but for some time. 
In the Biden family there’s a strange thing, there is no woman as old as any man.  I don't know how that happened, but that's the way it works in my family.  (Laughter.)
But as we say in America, the best-kept secret in American education is the community college system.  And it’s a bold and I think wise move India is taking to try to create hundreds and hundreds of community colleges.
We’ve also made progress on clean energy, defense cooperation, the partnerships between our universities and community colleges.  But there remains a gap between what we are doing and what we are capable of without in any way impacting on either of our countries’ sovereign decisions, without in any way compromising either of our countries’ ability to independently decide what course of action we should take on individual issues and the future generally.
And the reasons are understandable why they're still -- we haven’t made more progress.  In your country as well as mine, there are still those -- some who have lingering doubts of a Cold War era long gone by.  It’s time to put those doubts behind us and seize the opportunities ahead of us.  Leaders -— not bureaucracies -— should set the level of our ambition.
So let me state it plainly:  There is no contradiction between strategic autonomy and a strategic partnership.  I’ll say it again:  There is no contradiction between strategic autonomy and a strategic partnership.  Global powers are capable of both.
And it’s time we take this relationship to a new level for each of our own well-being.  The question is how do we bridge the gap between this vision and the present reality?  You are all practical businesswomen and men.  You know ultimately it’s how do you operationalize a vision.
I’d respectfully suggest that we begin by deepening our economic relationship to help accomplish our overarching individual domestic goals.  They are similar.  They are common.
And our vision and our interest as you look down five, 10 and 20 years, I can see no logical impediment to the development of this relationship in terms of our individual self-interest.
Today, as I speak –- well, not as I speak, but shortly, President Obama is going to be giving a major speech outlining the top priority for the Obama-Biden administration  And it’s straightforward and simple, how do we continue to shore up America’s future and the foundations of the middle class life in America with good-paying jobs, affordable health care, housing, education and the dignity in retirement.
India’s top priority is to lift hundreds of millions of people out of poverty to join the middle class -- totally consistent goals.   Together, in our view, we can help each other achieve our core goals.  And we’ve made a good start. 
In the last 13 years, we’ve increased fivefold our bilateral trade, reaching nearly $100 billion.  There’s not a one of you sitting out there that knows there is any logical impediment as to why that could not be fivefold that number.
There’s no reason, if our countries make the right choices, that we can’t grow together and more rapidly.
The United States is negotiating major new trade agreements across both the Atlantic and the Pacific -- so called TTIP in the Pacific (sic) -- and here in the Pacific, an agreement that would encompass not only the Pacific Basin all the way to the Indian Ocean, but also America and the entire hemisphere.  I recently went on a journey to Latin America and South America.  Chile, other countries are looking forward to this Trans-Pacific Partnership.  Not only to expand, but to enhance economic stability and in turn domestic stability.
Expanding trade between India and the United States can and should be a central part of this story.  But that requires us to be candid with each other about the obstacles that exist when it comes to a business environment: protection of intellectual property; requirements that companies buy local content; limits on foreign direct investment; inconsistent tax treatment; barriers to market access.  These are tough problems.  But we all know they have to be negotiated and worked through in order to meet the potential of this relationship.  Not just with us, but with other countries as well.  This instinct to protect your industries is fully comprehensible and easy to understand.
India has 600 million people under the age of 25 with unlimited capabilities, but in some cases limited horizons.  Your businesses are seeking any competitive edge they find, and why shouldn’t they? 
But I believe recent history of other developing countries and developed countries shows there is a better way to grow and strengthen your economy, although it takes some bold decisions.
A young Indian woman graduating from IIT Bombay who wants to start the next Tata Motors should be able to buy the best technology and parts, wherever in the world they come from -— as her competitors around the world are able to do. 
An Indian medical student with a brilliant idea for a life-saving medical device should know that his intellectual property will be protected and rewarded because that gives him the financial incentive and the intellectual motivation to continue to move forward.
Hundreds of millions of Indian consumers deserve access to the most affordable and reliable products to better their standard of living.  Now, look, I understand -– believe me –- how making even the most modest of changes of opening your markets impacts on interest groups.  It happens in my country, and it clearly happens in yours.
But you have an extraordinary opportunity to unleash the immense talents of the people of India in the global economy -— and power India’s growth for decades to come.  It is not easy.  I am not -- I am a public official.  I’ve been doing this my entire adult life.  These are difficult decisions to make.  It’s a little bit like, as my mother used to say, you got to take your medicine in order to be healthy -- a homely metaphor, but the truth of the matter is, they're difficult.
But the choices are not ours to make, they're India’s to make.  We could both do fine without one another.  We are not here -- I am not here, the President didn't ask me to come here to lecture, to suggest what is India’s interest.  That's for India to decide.  We know what is in our interest.  We believe what is in our interest, and a powerful, growing, vibrant Indian economy we believe is in our interest.  We know is in our interest.  And there are certain basic rules of the road of the 21st century that have to be met as a practical matter -- not dictated by us, but by the marketplace in order to be able to get there.
So America does not claim to be a disinterested party.  We see tremendous opportunities for American companies in technology and infrastructure, and in creating more efficient supply chains here in India. 
One place to start is would be with the Bilateral Investment Treaty.  It would give investors in both countries more certainty and predictability; fair treatment under a single, consistent set of rules for companies small and large, foreign and domestic.
I’m pleased that our countries are reengaging in talks toward a Bilateral Investment Treaty.  Both our governments have instructed our negotiators to see what progress can be made by the time Prime Minister Singh visits Washington this fall.
In the United States, we welcome Indian businesses investing in the United States.  We’ve already benefit from the investment of human capital.  Indians receive more skilled-worker visas to the United States than any other country in the world.  And the legislation our Congress is considering increases the number of temporary visas and Green Cards availability for highly skilled Indians to come work in the United States.  I know that causes, as my Italian friends say, some agita with some individual companies.  But the bottom line is there’s a net expansion.
At the same time, businesses and workers in both our countries benefit when there is a strong, predictable, and fair global trading system.  
In December, members of the World Trade Organization will meet in Bali.  We need to find a way forward to address India’s -- and I’ll be criticized for saying this -- India’s legitimate concerns about food security without distorting global trade.  It’s a difficult problem, but it must be addressed. 
     And also -- it also addresses many countries’ desire to reduce barriers at borders that harm their companies and set back development.
Success in Bali can help reinvigorate world trade, the World Trade Organization and show that it remains a vital forum to resolve these issues. 
In this and many other areas, India has an essential role to play -- both to take its rightful place in international rule-setting and to accept the responsibilities that come with it.  Because ultimately, the two go hand in hand.
The second thing we can do is have our brilliant scientists on both sides of the Pacific -– our brilliant scientists work together on a common, common interest:  clean energy and climate change to ensure that both countries can grow responsibly and sustainably.
In India -- I come from a part of America that -- where we’re only about seven feet above sea level.  Sea levels are rising.  They are rising.  It will affect tens of millions of people in India.
At home, America is working to lower carbon pollution that causes climate change.   In fact, we have brought it down to its lowest level in two decades.  We have much more to do, and we plan to do more.
India, too, needs to take concerted action –- all the more as your economy and your energy needs continue to grow.  I realize it’s a conundrum.  I have heard the debate with developing economies over the past 30 years.  You clear-cut your forest 200 years ago.  You did such and such.  You had an advantage.  True.  But it does not undercut the reality that we both have an overwhelming stake in seeing to it that we address the issue of climate change.
Of course India’s first priority is and must be lifting its citizens out of poverty.  But unless we can develop a sustainable path on a low-carbon path, the consequences of climate change will seriously undermine the development and growth, as well as harm the very health of the people of India.
You’ve all observed what’s happening in China now.  Allegedly a million people a year dying as a consequence o atmospheric pollution.  Reality ultimately intrudes.  And the reality is we have a worldwide problem.
This is not a favor to other nations.  It matters to India -- to the productivity of your farmlands, the availability of water, the risks you face from floods and rising seas. 
India is already taking steps.  But like us, India can do more.  And we are anxious and willing to work with you.
One thing we can do together right now is address pollutants called hydrofluorocarbons, HFCs.  The reason I’m very familiar with this is I come from a little state that has an outfit called the DuPont Company.  They had a great interest in refrigeration and HFCs when I talked about they should be eliminated.  We talk about stakeholders and interests.  Well, HFCs found in air conditioners and other products make an outsized contribution to climate change. 
I hope that India will join the United States, China and more than 100 other countries to work within the Montreal Protocols to phase down the production and consumption of HFCs.
Your leaders fully understand that in order to sustain your development India needs access to low-carbon technologies and other sources of clean energy.  And that’s why when I was a United States Senator and Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee I fought so hard in the United States Senate to champion the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Agreement.  It’s part of the path to sustainable energy in a growing, powerful country.  But part of that agreement was India committed to work with American companies as well as you build out those nuclear plants. 
And it’s important that we complete the first agreement between American companies and the Nuclear Power Corporation of India.
The reactors that India has authorized its nuclear company to purchase in -- I hope I pronounce it right -- Gujarat would generate as much as 6,000 megawatts of power.  To put that number in perspective: that would be enough energy to power two cities the size of Mumbai.
Third, although we are already helping India meet its military needs –- we can significantly increase our defense cooperation by what it already is, without in any way compromising each other’s sovereignty.
Cargo aircraft called C-130s that were sold to India are now saving the lives of flood victims in the mountains of northern India.  We’re ready to go forward.  Rather than just India purchasing from us, together we can graduate to have a true partnership or co-production and co-development agreements so that together we can design and co-produce the systems and technologies of the future.
   But it’s not just military-to-military where we have increased our cooperation.  Our cooperation has grown dramatically in our shared fight against terrorism.  India has suffered grievous attacks against your parliament and here n Mumbai.  We suffered 9/11.
Together we are working hand-in-hand, sharing intelligence on terrorist groups so there will never be another 9/11; there will never another 26/11.
Fourth, we want to deepen our strategic partnership on regional as well as global issues.  The United States is elevating our engagement in the Asia-Pacific region.  We refer to it as rebalance.
Twenty, even 10 years ago, some might have suggested that not have included India in these discussions.  Today, India is an indispensable part of our rebalance toward the Asia-Pacific.  Indians have looked east through travel and trade for a millennia.  These ties are reemerging.  India is negotiating a trade deal with ASEAN.  It is becoming more involved in regional institutions.  And that is good news for the region and for us.
Stronger connections between India and Southeast Asia will be a good business -- good for business I should say and good for stability.  And both of us have a strong interest in maintaining the security of the sea lanes, freedom of navigation from the South China Sea to the Indian Ocean.  And each have to get our relationship right with China.
I’ve heard people talk about the U.S.-China relationship as everything from the next Cold War to the next G2.  None -- neither of those characterizations is accurate.
Like India, and I’ve had discussions on this issue while I’ve been here, but I knew it already, like India, we have a complex relationship with China.  It has important elements of cooperation and also competition.  And we want it to be constructive.  There are three big nations -- we are three big nations -- China, India and the United States -- with our own perspectives.  We have significant common interests.  All three of us and the entire region would benefit if we coordinated more closely.
America and India have already built strong trilateral dialogue with Japan.  It is past time we launch one with China.  America and India are cooperating closely in Afghanistan.  It’s been the subject of many of my discussions thus far with your leadership.
I know there are questions about the U.S. position on reconciliation with the Taliban.  I want to be clear:  We have always been committed to an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned process that meets three outcomes.  The Taliban must, one, break with Al Qaeda permanently; stop the violence; accept the Afghan constitution and guarantee free and equal treatment for women.
India has exercised responsible leadership in Afghanistan through assistance, investment and strategic agreements with the Afghan government.
The United States is committed to supporting Afghanistan through our Strategic Partnership after the transition is complete at the end of 2014.  We are not leaving the region –- even as Afghanis step up and take responsibility. 
On Pakistan, we support the early outreach between Prime Ministers Singh and Sharif.  It’s not our place to lecture.  It’s not our place to dictate.  Our relationship will not be defined by India’s relationship to Pakistan.  But America and the world have a deep stake in closer ties between India and Pakistan -- an incredibly difficult nut to crack, but it’s yours to crack. 
We have no illusions that it will be easy.  But as you know better than we do, progress would benefit everyone and make all of us, particularly this region, more secure. 
So there’s a great deal we hope India will contribute to.  We believe, discussions I’ve had thus far, the peace and prosperity in the 21st century will be impacted upon by the outcomes of that relationship.  That's why President Obama has called our relationship with India “a defining partnership for the century ahead.”
     He is not engaging in hyperbole.   He means it literally. And so do I.  It’s the defining partnership in the century ahead.  That’s why he stood in the Indian Parliament and declared to the world, that “we look forward to a reformed United Nations Security Council that includes India as a permanent member.”  (Appaluse.)  That’s why yesterday, on behalf of the President Obama, I invited Prime Minister Singh to make a visit to Washington at the end of September.
We have an incredibly full agenda, but nothing gives me more hope for the prospects of that agenda, as we approach it, nothing gives me more hope that we can accomplish it together than our people 720,000 visas per year that are issued here in India to go to the United States, the 100,000 talented Indian students studying at American Universities -– with the aim at doubling that number by 2020, and tripling the number of Americans studying in India.
But the foundation of my hope and expectations is built upon the certain knowledge that our people share a common set of values and peaceful vision for the world.
As I said, be critical, look down the road.  Where is there an intersection in the future of the 21st century where we are likely to be at odds with one another on the big issues?
For those who doubt the vision that the President and I share, I would refer them to the founder of the modern state of India, Mahatma Gandhi.  I had the honor of visiting the place where he literally spent his last days, as probably all of you have as well.  And as I stood there, remembering him as a young child who -- being involved in the Civil Rights Movement and how Dr. King looked to Gandhi, I was reminded once again, which is not very -- how can I say it -- sophisticated to say to a sophisticated audience, but I was reminded once again that dreams matter.  Dreams matter.  A nation without a vision to where it wants to go will be buffeted by the swirling winds of the world and not have the ability to grab the reins to try to determine its own future.  Vision matters.
But they are only realized, as all of you know, by hard work and incredible persistence.  So as you look to the horizon, it’s very important we keep our feet on the ground, and continue the day-to-day painstaking effort of building this great partnership even if it means in the beginning we only make incremental small changes.  But every day must be forward.  No matter how small -- no matter how small the measure of progress is.
I am absolutely confident -- absolutely confident in the future of this relationship.  Not because I’m naïve.  I’ve been around longer than most of you.  I’ve been doing this kind of business my entire adult life.  My confidence is based on the history of the journey of both our countries.  But I am confident.
May God bless you all, may God bless India and may God protect our troops.  Thank you so very much.  (Applause.)
END
2:14 P.M. IST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  July 19, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on Asia-Pacific Policy
George Washington University
Washington, D.C.
1:34 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Good afternoon, folks.  Thank you for your patience.
I’d like to begin by thanking -- Mr. President, thank you for offering the venue here at GW.  You’re always generous, and we appreciate it a great deal.  And I was -- it’s terrible being dated.  I was -- I did speak the first year that the Center for American Progress was inaugurated, and here I’m speaking at the 10th anniversary.  And the amazing thing is they're still going; that's having me speak there first. 
But, Neera, thank you.  We miss you.  And, Rich, thank you as well.  And to the ambassadors who are here, thank you very much.  I’m honored that you’d take the time.
Today I want to talk to you about why and how we are pursuing our announced policy of elevated engagement in the Asia-Pacific, and where I believe -- we believe -- that policy is headed.
When President Obama and I came to office, to state the obvious, we inherited two wars.  And it was costing us in blood and treasure and time.  And we knew we had to end both those wars responsibly.  We’ve done that in Iraq, and we’re doing that as I speak in Afghanistan.  We’ll obviously continue to be engaged in both places.  And of course we’ll continue to take the fight to Al Qaeda and its affiliates there or wherever they are.  But winding down those wars has allowed us to turn to the opportunities that reflect the realities of a fast-changing world. 
We ask ourselves two things in the review of how to proceed:  Where should we focus additional attention and resources that would enable us to create greater opportunity at home and generate greater growth -- economic growth -- around the world?  And where must we make strategic investments that are required to enhance not only our security but global stability?
Both -- I say to the ambassadors -- both pointed to the Asia-Pacific.
In terms of economics, the Asia-Pacific region —- stretching from India to the Pacific nations of the Americas -— is home to a middle class of about a billion people.  Some of the fastest growing growth rates in the world are within that region.  Emerging markets whose choices will shape the character of the entire global economy are within that purview. 
So we reached out.  We reached out to deepen economic ties and promote open markets and a rule-based competition for the 21st century. 
We finished a free-trade agreement with South Korea, as well as deals with Panama and Colombia.  We launched negotiations on a new Trans-Pacific Partnership that will connect diverse -- economies as diverse as Singapore and Peru.  We’ve worked toward a more constructive economic relationship with China, including through the Strategic and Economic Dialogue.  And I opened the fifth round of that dialogue just last week. 
In terms of security, we undertook a major strategic review at the Defense Department and with our security personnel on how to assess how our global posture and where do we need to evolve to match the moment. 
In the Asia-Pacific, we saw a region of remarkable promise, but also genuine uncertainty and political risk.  Many nations have experienced rapid economic transformation that has fundamentally created a new dynamic:  rising ambitions and rising tensions.  But the rules and norms that could provide predictability to deal with both those changes, the order needed remained incomplete.
We are focused on the risks of disruptions of commerce, proliferation, human disasters, conflict between nations and the persistent threat posed by North Korea.
So we set about doing several things:  first of all, strengthening our alliances; deepening security partnerships and investing like never before in regional institutions to help manage disputes peacefully.
President Obama adopted a new Defense Strategic Guidance endorsed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff after months of study that elevates our focus in the Asia-Pacific area.
And economically and strategically it’s clear why the United States had to rebalance -- to direct more resources and attention toward the Asia-Pacific region.
Because imagine what can happen if growing Asia-Pacific middle classes help lift the global economy even more than they already are; if nations reject the temptations of zero-sum thinking and rise peacefully together; if progress toward greater rights and freedoms proves that no country has to make a choice between democracy and development, which is a false choice.
Let me put it slightly differently:  Just imagine what will happen if those things don’t come to pass.  We’ll all be in a world of trouble.  So we’re all in, this administration.  Absolutely committed to this rebalance.  The President is absolutely committed, and so am I.  And so is our entire national security and economic teams.
And you don’t need to look any further than my own recent engagement to understand the breadth and scope of the rebalance.  I’m traveling to India next week.  Twenty, even 10 years ago, some might have suggested that India be left out of discussions about the Asia-Pacific.   
One of the reasons why President Obama called our relationship with India “a defining partnership of the century ahead” is that India is increasingly looking east as a force for security and growth in Southeast Asia and beyond.
To us that's welcome news.  We encourage it.  We welcome India’s engagement in the region, and we welcome its efforts to develop new trade and transportation links by land and by sea in the area.
I’ll also visit Singapore, a country of 5 million people, that has become the 17th-largest economy in the world, a partner in the TPP and an important player in Southeast Asia and beyond. 
The reasons President Obama has put particular focus on Southeast Asia:  ASEAN now represents a $2 trillion economy of 600 million people.  There is more American investment in Southeast Asia than in China.  Southeast Asian nations like Singapore and Indonesia have become important partners on everything from counter-proliferation to counter-piracy.  That’s why I’m going to Singapore. 
And, of course, at the core of our strategy in the region are our alliances:    Japan, South Korea, Australia, the Philippines, Thailand.
Across the board in these alliances, we’re at a high water mark in terms of cooperation between our leaders -- both military and political -- and the support of our people.  
Closer to home, our intensified engagement within the Western Hemisphere is also part —- not just parallel to -– our overall rebalancing policy. 
You see that very concretely in the Trans-Pacific Partnership which includes five countries in the Western Hemisphere.  You can also see it in the initiatives within the Hemisphere like the Alliance for the Pacific -- a new group of free-market-oriented countries that are integrating their economies and looking west for trade and investment.
As I said in a speech not long ago, for the first time, at least the first time I can remember, I believe the first time in history, it’s possible -- it’s not Pollyannaish -- to envision an America -- an Americas that is middle class, secure and democratic from northern Canada to the tip of Chile and everything in between.  There’s much work to be done, but that is within reach. 
That kind of Americas connected economically, strategically and through common values can make a great contribution to a more prosperous and secure Pacific. 
That’s one of the reasons why President Obama recently visited Mexico and Costa Rica.  That’s why I was recently in Colombia, Thailand [sic] and Brazil in May and will return to the region this fall.  So what does all this add up to?
Our goal is to help tie Asia-Pacific nations together –- from India to the Americas -— through strong alliances, institutions and partnerships.
For the past 60 years, the security we provided has enabled the region’s people to turn their talents and hard work into an economic miracle.  And now, we want to hasten the emergence of an Asian-Pacific order that delivers security and prosperity for all the nations involved.
In short, we want to help lead in creating the 21st century rules of the road that will benefit not only the United States, and the region, but the world as a whole.  The lifeblood of the region, to state the obvious, is economic development.  But growth has slowed in India, China and many places in Asia.  And each country faces distinct and different challenges. 
But from our perspective, the way forward is fairly clear.  To spark new growth, there has to be:  fewer barriers at and behind our borders; protections for intellectual property to reward innovation; new commitments to make sure everyone plays by the same rules because that’s what attracts investment and jobs; as well as greater economic integration.
That’s what we’re pursuing right now, today in Malaysia as our team negotiates the Trans-Pacific Partnership with countries as diverse as     Vietnam, Chile, New Zealand, Mexico, very soon, Japan, and at which point the group will account for 40% of the world’s GDP.
The TPP has potential to set new standards for collective commitments to fair competition -- on state-owned enterprises, fair competition on investments, labor, the environment, open markets for automobiles and other industries. 
And we firmly believe this will create a strong incentive for other nations to raise their standards, as well, so that they can join.  We’ve already had discussions with some of those very nations both in the Americas as well as in the Pacific.
But not only is this ambitious, this TPP effort of ours, we believe it is also doable.  And we’re working hard to get this done this year.
At the same time, we’re reaching out to the emerging economies of Southeast Asia: partnering with Lower Mekong countries to improve food security, connectivity, water and health; encouraging responsible investments and reforms in Burma; and last fall, the President launched a new initiative for Enhanced Economic Engagement with the ASEAN. 
We are addressing the challenges in our economic relationships with China as well.  They are not at all inconsistent.  We do not view our relationship and future relations with China in terms of conflict or the talk of inevitable conflict.  We view it in terms of a healthy mix of competition and cooperation.  A competition that we welcome.  It’s stamped into our DNA.  We like to compete.  Competition is good for both of us, as long as the game is fair. 
It is clear that the Chinese understand that to reverse their declining growth, there are internal reforms they need to make -- not reforms we’re suggesting they have to make.  They’ve made their own judgment -- judgments if they follow through on them will not only help China in our view, but help the region and the world.  They’ve concluded China needs to shift to a more consumer-driven economy.  They’ve concluded they have to create a market-based, well-regulated financial system.  And they’ve concluded they need to liberalize their exchange rates.  It will be difficult.  It’s difficult internally for them to do that, but I’m convinced they believe -- and we clearly do -- that it’s necessary.
And we are engaging directly with India as it makes some fundamental choices that the Ambassador could speak to more directly than I could about its own economic future.
In the last 13 years, we’ve increased fivefold our bilateral trade, reaching nearly $100 billion.  But if you look at it from a distance, an uninformed person looked at it from a distance, there is no reason, that if our countries make the right choices, trade cannot grow fivefold or more.
Just this week, India announced that it will relax caps on foreign direct investment in certain sectors.  We still have a lot of work to do on a wide range of issues, including the civil nuclear cooperation, a bilateral investment treaty, policies protecting innovation.  There’s a lot of work to do.  But we believe doing -- going with an open mind and listening, as well as making our case, we believe it can be done. 
As we all strive for greater growth, we have to recognize that the impact of climate change also has an impact on growth as well as security.  This is a priority for the President and for me.  America now has the lowest level of carbon emission in two decades.  And we’re determined to move further, and in the process where we can, where our technological capability is available, also help other countries do the same. 
That’s why we’re working with ASEAN to promote investment in clean energy; why we’re helping Pacific island nations mitigate the effects of rising sea levels.  They are rising.  We just concluded an agreement with China to reduce the use of pollutants called HFCs that cause climate change.  And there’s no reason we cannot do more with India as well.  That’s why Secretary Kerry agreed to an enhanced dialogue with India on climate change just last month. 
Look, economic growth may be at the core of all we’re saying.  Economic growth critically depends on peace and stability.  That’s why we have to be -- there have to be 21st century rules of the road not only in the economic sphere, but also with regard to security.
With regard to maritime disputes, it’s critical that all nations have a clear understanding of what constitutes acceptable international behavior.  That means no intimidation, no coercion, no aggression, and a commitment from all parties to reduce the risk of mistake and miscalculation.
My dad, God love him, used to have an expression.  He’d say, Joey, the only war that’s worse than one that’s intended is one that is unintended.  The prospects where they’re so close -- cheek-to-jowl -- for mistakes are real.  So it’s in everyone’s interest that there be freedom of navigation, unimpeded lawful commerce, respect for international laws and norms, and peaceful resolution of territorial disputes.
That’s why I encourage China and ASEAN to work even more quickly to reach an agreement on a code of conduct in the South China Sea.  Setting clear rules is the first step to managing these disputes.  And the U.S. has a strong interest in seeing that happen as well.
With regard to North Korea, the one thing I think everyone now agrees on -- we agree that its nuclear and missile programs present a clear and present danger to stability in the area, in East Asia in particular.  That’s why we’re working closely with our allies, Japan and South Korea.  But we’re also working more closely than the 40 years I’ve been engaged with China and with Russia.
In light of North Korea’s recent provocative behavior, we welcome President Xi’s important statement:  achieving a denuclearized Korean Peninsula, as that being a Chinese priority.  Not just something they wish for, but a priority.  We welcome that firm assertion.
Now, North Korea is calling for dialogue.  As my mother would say, I’ve seen this movie before.  (Laughter.)  We’ve been there before.  But we are ready.  We are ready, but only if North Korea is prepared to engage in genuine negotiations.  We will not countenance North Korea’s pattern of provoking a crisis and then insisting they be rewarded in order to cease and desist from the actions they are taking.  We’ve been there before, only to find that once they’re gotten the space or the aid they need, they return to the same provocative, dangerous behavior and continue their nuclear march.
North Korea can have peace and prosperity like the rest of the region, but only without nuclear weapons.  North Korea has a clear choice:  It can choose a better path for its people, or continue down the road they’re on. 
Make no mistake about it, though.  We are open to engaging with any nation that’s prepared to live up to its international obligations.  That’s what we did in Burma.  And I think most would say we’re already seeing some tangible benefits from that engagement. 
So we’ve got a full agenda ahead of us in Asia.  And we’re committed to seeing it through.  But as I travel around the world, and I’m heading to India -- I’m about to cross the 700,000-mile barrier since Vice President, not counting the previous 36 years -- but I hear questions wherever I go, questions in Asia about whether we’re truly committed to this rebalance.  I’ve also heard questions in my recent trips to Europe, with European leaders, about whether or not we’re going to be leaving Europe behind. 
It should be clear on its face, we’re not leaving Europe.  I recently spoke to the European nations, NATO members and EU members, in Munich.  And I said that Europe remains “the cornerstone of our engagement with the rest of the world.”  That is a fact.  We’re not going anywhere. 
As a matter of fact, we’re absolutely convinced that our engagement in the Pacific is in the overwhelming self-interest of Europe.  We’re convinced the combination of new transatlantic economic agreements that we’re now negotiating and the Trans-Pacific Partnership I’ve discussed, they reinforce one another.  They are not at odds with one another.  Together, they’re designed to update and strengthen the global economic rules of the world in the 21st century.
Europe, just like us, will benefit greatly as well from stability in the Pacific, in Asia.  And by the way, there is no reason why we cannot bring greater focus to the Asia-Pacific and keep our eye on the ball in the Middle East.  Folks, that’s what big powers do.  To use the vernacular, we can walk and chew gum at the same time.  That’s what big powers do. 
And there is no evidence that we are taking our eye off the ball -- as we should [sic] in the Middle East, leaving Europe or not intending on following through on our rebalance in the Asia-Pacific area.
Folks, we’re better positioned than any time before to be able to do it all.  I know you’ll think it sounds like a campaign assertion I’ve been making for years, but America is back.  When I was last in China, as I pointed out to the Chinese leadership, it’s never, never, never been a good bet to bet against America.  The resiliency of the American people and the nature of our system -- America is back. 
To paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of our demise are very premature.  Our businesses have created 7.2 million jobs since we’ve taken office.  We’ve gone from losing more than 400,000 jobs a month, over 12 months in 2009, to creating over 200,000 jobs per month thus far this year.  Manufacturing is back -- the biggest increase in manufacturing in nearly 20 years.  And an awful lot of high-tech companies are looking to come home. 
There’s a reason for it.  American workers are incredibly productive -- three times as productive as Chinese workers, to give you one example.  They can be assured their intellectual property will be protected.  We have a transparent court system that will enforce contracts. 
Our deficit is down more than 50 percent as a share of the economy since we took office.  Household wealth -- over $17 trillion in household wealth was lost in the Great Recession we inherited.  It’s all back.  We’re producing more energy from all sources.  We now have over 100 years’ supply of natural gas that would enable us to meet every single need we have in America -- energy need for the next 100 years.  We’re the largest natural gas producer in the world -- another reason why companies are coming back.  The cost is a third to a fifth of what it is around the world.
We are prepared to help other countries as well.  Our oil imports are the lowest they’ve been in the last 20 years.  And I believe -- if my colleagues from abroad will forgive me, I believe we remain the most innovative country in the world. 
But I also think, folks, that the rest of the world understands why this is happening, and it’s not just the good fortune of having shale gas or having two oceans, et cetera.  I think it’s because of the enduring strength of our people and of our system.  For all our difficulty in education for our children, they’re still taught to challenge orthodoxy.  No one in America is diminished or punished for challenging orthodoxy. 
It’s the only way there can be a breakthrough, is to challenge orthodoxy -- where competition is fair; where people have a right to express their views, practice their religion, and decide their future.  These are universal values.  They’re not unique to Americans.  I believe there is no Asian exception to the universal desire for freedom. 
And the issues that young people are seized with all across Asia and the world -- corruption, land rights, pollution, food and product safety -- these are all fundamentally linked to openness and transparency, to greater rights and freedom.
In my humble opinion, no nation has to adopt the exact system we have.  That’s not what I’m suggesting at all.  But it’s awful hard to be innovative where you can’t breathe free.  It’s awful hard to make significant technological breakthroughs where orthodoxy is the norm. 
In my humble opinion, the very things that made us such a prosperous, innovative and resilient nation -- our openness, our free exchange of ideas, free enterprise and liberty -- all of which have their downsides, as we’ve recently seen in Boston and other places -- they have downsides -- but we would not trade them for all the world. 
Presumptuous for me to say, because you never tell another leader what’s in their interest, never tell another country what they should do.  But I believe these elements are the fundamental ingredients for success for any nation in the 21st century.
There was that famous line by the founder of Apple, when asked at Stanford, what do I have to do to be more like you?  And his response was, think different.  You can only think different where you can think freely, where you can breathe free air.
So let me conclude by saying we see, as Neera said, this is not a zero-sum game.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest that India continues to grow.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest that China grows.  It’s overwhelmingly in our interest that the world economy grow.  Because we believe Asia’s success is fundamentally linked to ours.
So the President and I are going to continue to reach across the ocean, both east and west, particularly to the indispensable Pacific nations, to help us shape a prosperous future, for America, for their people, and I would argue for the world. 
Thank you all for being so gracious and listening.  Thank you.  (Applause.) 
                                               END                               2:04 P.M. EDT
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 31, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Biden and Brazilian Vice President Temer
Diplomatic Center
Brasilia, Brazil
1:08 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT TEMER: (As interpreted) It’s my pleasure to welcome Vice President Joe Biden.
And on a more personal note, I’d like to say that some time ago as a representative of Brazil at taking office of the President of Mexico, I was happy to sit next to Vice President Biden.  And there we had the opportunity to have a long conversation at the time, at a Latin America dinner there, for a very long dinner.  So we had the opportunity to talk about many issues that are of interest to Brazil and the U.S.
And particularly at the personal level, both of us were from the legal field, and we had the opportunity to exchange a lot of ideas on that occasion.  And I think that has strengthened our ties of friendship I believe between myself and Vice President Biden.
And it is precisely within the context of growing and closer ties between Brazil and the U.S., and that's the setting for the visit of Vice President Biden, following the visit paid by President Obama, and followed by a trip of President Dilma to the United States.  And now in July, President Dilma will pay a state visit. 
And as you may know, a state visit is a very special visit to the United States.  And that is done only once a year.  That's the information I have received.  And that reveals --  that shows the importance of the relationship between Brazil and the U.S. and also the closer relationship between the U.S. and Brazil.
And I say so to you, the members of the press, that it’s very often said that we in Brazil have had -- have kept a very close relationship with African and South American and the Arabian countries.  And that is true because we did build those closer ties.  But we have not withdrawn from a very close relationship with the United States of America.  We also -- because the bilateral trade between Brazil and the U.S. is a very close one after our -- second only to China -- and the relationship -- trade relationship between Brazil and the U.S.  And so we are both sides very much interested in strengthening these ties, the commercial ties, which are being strengthened by these visits I have just mentioned.
And talking to Vice President Biden we have addressed topics that he had already addressed with President Wilma, especially in the field of energy, of technological innovation regarding a program we are very proud of here in Brazil, which is the Science Without Frontiers.  And I have underscored to Vice President Biden that the U.S. is the country that is most sought after by those who receive the scholarships from the Science Without Borders program.
And as a sign of this we have over 5,000 students -- graduate and undergrad students -- who have gone to the U.S. so as to add to their own education the technological knowledge they receive in the U.S. and bring it to our country.
And I also comment on a statement he did in Rio de Janeiro saying that it is not -- democracy and social development are not incompatible.  And as a rule I highlighted to Vice President Biden that in our country, we adopted in our country since in our institution we have been able to bring together the concepts of liberalism with those of the welfare state.  And liberalism is perceived as the wider freedom, the freedom of expression, freedom of speech, and also -- and specifically the freedom of press -- with a high degree of preservation of individual rights. 
And on the other hand, we have been able to adopt the rules of the welfare state as we ensure the right to housing, which have generated programs such as the family grant program, the housing program Minha Casa, Minha Vida, which has allowed millions of people to graduate from extreme poverty and move up to the middle classes in our country.  And this has promoted an international insertion over our country and international scenario and -- within the international scene.
So we have -- as I said, we have addressed topics such as energy, technological innovation.  We also have referred to several international issues, and I wish -- I’m very pleased to share some opinions with Vice President Biden regarding international conflicts -- as example, the issues in Syria and the Palestine-Israel conflict.  And we have both highlighted that there is a strong coincidence in the stands taken by both governments of Brazil and the U.S.
And I have not left -- I did not forget to mention and I was well received by Vice President Biden, we have been reinforced of the interest of Brazil to have a seat at the U.N. Security Council as we have also received the support for application of Sao Paulo in Brazil for the 2020 Expo.  So next week in Paris, there will be another event which will be defining the city to host the Expo 2020.  And Brazil and Sao Paulo are applicants, and so we are advocating this possibility.
And as final remarks, I wish to highlight how honored we feel with your visit.  And as you will see in the words to be followed by Vice President Biden, he is much more communicative than myself, and he will speak very properly about the reasons that have brought him to Brazil and the enthusiasm he takes home after his contact with Brazil. 
And as you see, Vice President Biden, the press will pay keen attention to your words.  Thank you.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Vice President.  Let me begin by saying I don't want to go home.  I wish we were able to stay and take advantage of the hospitality longer.  My wife and my granddaughters are with me as well, and they are now looking at that beautiful lake and the gigantic swimming pool in the hotel we’re staying in.  I think I’m going to have trouble getting them on the plane.
If you wonder about -- and I joked earlier in my visit in Rio de Janeiro where some Brazilians refer to Brazil as a developing country, you are no longer a developing -- you are a developed country.  And if you need any evidence of that is the World Cup, Pope Francis coming here first, the Olympics.  And now my friend is lobbying me on 2020.  I tell you it’s amazing.
We have become friends.  We got a chance to not only learn about each of our countries a little more when we were at the   of the President of Mexico, but we learned we have some deep and common interest, particularly constitutional law which we both taught, as well as my passion and his for equality for women worldwide.  And it’s been a common bond beyond what -- I guess you didn't like what I said, huh?  You turned the lights out.
But let me say that earlier today I had a wide-ranging discussion with your President.  She’s a leader who is literally laser focused on addressing the issues that matter most to the people of Brazil.  And the good news is the issues that matter most to the people of Brazil are the issues that matter most to the people of the United States.
And I didn't have to spend long -- although we had a long conversation that went well beyond what either of us had anticipated -- I now understand why President Obama considers her such a good partner.  And that's why we both -- the President and I -- are anxious, truly anxious for her to visit in October. 
We occasionally have -- in the past have had more than one state visit in a year, but the President wanted to make a statement that the first state visit of this year is extended to your President as an evidence of our respect and our desire to further deepen the relationship.
And we’re extremely pleased that the President actually accepted the invitation.  And this is the first state visit in the second term.  And as I said a reflection -- a reflection of our great respect for your country.
As I said on Wednesday, I believe that 2013 can and should mark the beginning of a new era in U.S.-Brazil relations.  But words will not get us there.  We have a good deal of work that we have to get done between now and the end of the year to make that promise a reality.  But we’re on our way.
Over the past four years, the President of the United States has been here.  I have been here.  Ten of our Cabinet members have been here.  That has never happened before in the history of the relationship to the best of my knowledge between our country and yours.   And it is a clear reflection of how important we believe this relationship to be. 
We both acknowledge that there are gaps between what we have accomplished together and what we are capable of together.  And I discussed with your President and Vice President the ambitious agenda that I think we should be focusing on to bridge that gap.
We spoke about how to deepen trade and investment in both our nations.  Our annual trading relationship has now surpassed $100 billion a year, but there is literally no reason -- no reason why the world’s largest and seventh largest economies can’t increase that fivefold over time.  That would generate so many jobs in both our countries and further tighten the relationships between our countries.
We spoke about how to remove barriers to trade and also how to achieve greater certainty for investors in both our countries.  You have significantly increased direct foreign investment in the United States, and we welcome it, and we seek more.
On energy, we discussed how we can build a partnership that reflects the ambition of both our countries in this area.  As some of you know, two days ago, I spent time at your state-owned and actually now private and state enterprise going through a deep briefing on the promise of pre-salt oil that is immense.  The find is immense.
We also talked about how we could work together on areas that you have far surpassed us.  You produce 50 percent of your energy with renewable energy.  Our goal is to get to 20 percent by the middle of the next decade.  We have a lot to learn from you -- a lot to learn from you.
We also think -- and it’s been discussed you may be able to learn something from us in being able to access shale gas.  The access of shale gas in an environmentally sound way has radically altered America’s energy prospects -- radically altered those prospects.
Energy now, natural gas is less than $2 in the United States.  It’s $17 or more in Europe and other places.  It has great potential for your country, as well as for ours.
We discussed the growing place and presence on the world stage that Brazil has, and we made plans to do more to fight hunger in Haiti and promote development in Africa.  And I want to applaud Brazil’s $900 million write-off of African debt.  You are not only a serious player in the international community, you are an incredibly responsible player.
And as I said on Wednesday, and I said to you earlier, Brazil is no longer an emerging nation.  Its actions like the one that I’ve just mentioned show -- show -- how Brazil has emerged.  That doesn't mean there isn’t more work to do.  Both Brazil and the United States have to keep working at the persistent challenges we face:  delivering jobs to our constituencies, growth, tackling inequity, promoting opportunity and security for all.
But the world has much to learn from Brazil’s success.  You’ve shown that nation’s need not choose between democracy and development, between market-based economies and smart social policy.  I think that is -- I think you underestimate what a profound impact the last 15 years and the way you’ve arrived at your success has had on the rest of the world.  There are scores of nations today, from the Arab Spring, across all continents trying to determine is it possible -- is it possible -- to have development and democracy.  Brazil has demonstrated that it is possible.  Not only possible, but it’s the best path to development.
We talked about the critical importance of tapping our people’s shared passion for innovation in education.  My wife, who is with me today, is a full-time professor at a community college.  She teaches a full load.  She has an expression she’s used for the last 10 years:  Any country that out-educates us will out-compete us.  Any country that out-educates us will out-compete us.
You not only have great raw materials and great resources, you have human resources that are tremendous, and we are anxious to work with you.  When President Obama announced his 100,000 Strong initiative, and your President announced your Science Without Borders -- I believe that's the name of -- Science Without Borders or Without Frontiers, we embraced it.  And the fact of the matter is 5,000 Brazilian students seeking undergraduate and graduate degrees are in a total of 46 states within the United States of America attending what we respectfully would suggested are the finest research universities in the world.
It is good for us, and it is good for you.  We always learn -- we learn from that.  The reason we have been successful is because we’ve invited the world in, because we’ve expanded immigration, and we expand invitations to come and see us.
But there’s a secondary reason I might say, Mr. Vice President, we think this is so important.  You and I were talking about this very briefly on the way down. 
Ladies and gentlemen, those nations that are the closest, cooperate the most, and even when they have differences, negotiate those differences are those nations where each other’s nation understands, has a feeling for, has a taste for, has a sense of the people in the other nation.  There’s only way to do that:  Be there.  Be there.
That's why through our ambassador, we have gone from 12 weeks I believe it is to two days or three days to get a visa.  That's why we’re doubling the consulates we have here available.  We want Brazilians coming to the United States -- not merely for commerce, but to see us, to begin to understand us with our faults and all -- our faults and our strengths -- because we’re convinced that if our people see firsthand what’s happening here in Brazil, meet firsthand your people and the same occurs, this relationship will become tighter and tighter.
Ladies and gentlemen, finally I want to raise an issue that the Vice President and I have pursued in our public life, the scourge of violence against women.  Your administration, Mr. Vice President, your leadership has taken on domestic violence, and you’ve pulled it out of the shadows.  I’m the author of the Violence Against Women Act in my country, the first fundamental change we’ve had in terms of how we legislatively view the role of the government in accommodating the end of domestic violence.
You’ve set up domestic violence hotlines that have significantly increased reporting of abuse and opened new shelters for victims, exactly what we did.  There was a famous Justice of one -- of our Supreme Court.  He said, the best disinfectant is sunlight.  Sunlight is the best disinfectant.  And shining a bright light on the abuse of women, shining a light on the abuse that takes place is the one certain way to end the abuse.
I leave Brazil full of optimism -- optimism -- about what we can accomplish together.  This is a moment of -- for relationships to begin to take on a different texture, a greater depth.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are the first, you are the seventh largest economy in the world.  We are both great democracies.  We both are inclusive peoples.  It is hard to imagine how this hemisphere can meet its potential without the relationship between the two largest nations in the hemisphere working together, and the international implications of that are profound.
So I look forward, as the President does, to your President’s visit.  I look forward to coming back many times, and I look forward to the great good we can do for both our people by working together.
And, Mr. Vice President, thank you for your hospitality, and I want to thank the press for paying attention in my visit to what I’ve had to say.  I appreciate it very much.  (Applause.)
END
1:29 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 28, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Joe Biden in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN,
IN STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
Diplomatic Center
Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
  3:47 P.M. AST
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  Good afternoon, everyone.  Mr. President, Madam Prime Minister, distinguished leaders of Caribbean countries, I want to thank you all -- and I mean all of you -- for what for me was a very fruitful and good meeting.  I learned a great deal, and I've also learned we have a lot more work to do together.
And I want to thank all the leaders who traveled here.  Madam Prime Minister, you hosted this.  We contacted you on a relatively short notice -- all of you -- to see if you’d be willing -- President Obama asked me if I had an opportunity whether I'd have a chance to meet with each of you, and I thank you for your hospitality and doing it on such short notice.
I'm here because President Obama wanted me to have an opportunity to dialogue with all of you and because our country is deeply invested and wants to become more deeply invested in a partnership with all the nations of the Caribbean.
Our search for growth, jobs and affordable supplies of energy, our fight against transnational crime, and the protection of our climate and our environment -- all of these issues, all of these issues have no respect for borders and they affect all of our borders.  They directly affect the people of my country and each and every one of yours.
Economically, the President and I are aware that island nations face special difficulties.  The cost of doing business can be higher.  Goods are more expensive.  And in a globalized world, everything can become more attenuated.  And so through Caribbean Basin Initiative, we've eliminated tariffs on 85 percent of your goods, and now we're looking for additional ways -- and you’ve discussed some of them with me today -- to help create growth and diversity in the economies within the Caribbean.
Today I will sign, on behalf of my country, a trade and investment framework agreement with the Caribbean community that will give us all a vehicle -- a vehicle to overcome special, specific, practical barriers to trade and investment, and accommodate those changes as rapidly as possible. 
Our goal is not simply growth, but it’s growth that reaches everybody.  And we spoke today about everything from anti-poverty measures, to support for small businesses, to greater opportunities and protections for all citizens, regardless of their gender and regardless of their sexual orientation.  And we'll continue to invest with you on education and innovation. 
We had a significant discussion at lunch with a bunch of us -- it was impromptu but somewhat detailed about the strategies that exist in your countries and mine to improve educational access, include educational excellence and access to higher education.  Because that’s how, as my wife, who is with me -- not here, but here today I believe visited a school -- she’s on this trip with me.  She’s a full-time professor at a community college as the Second Lady.  And she has an expression -- she says, any country that out-educates you will out-compete you.  Any country that out-educates you will out-compete you.  So it’s ultimately about having the best education, best educated populaces we can have.
And we're going to continue to invest in education and innovation.  And I think we discussed again today some novel arenas in which we can do more than we're doing now, because that's how we'll succeed in the 21st century. 
Through the Caribbean Idea Marketplace competition, we're connecting diaspora business leaders in the United States in particular with Caribbean entrepreneurs.  And as we work to meet President Obama’s challenge, we welcome 100,000 -- 100,000 -- students from across the Americas, and we hope to send the same number of American students to the rest of the Americas.  We're working very hard to include more students throughout the Caribbean.
We also spoke today about how to lower costs of energy and increase -- increase -- the share that comes from renewable energy.  There’s probably no group of nations better situated to take advantage of renewable energy possibilities than here in the Caribbean.  And we know that many Caribbean nations pay three times more for energy than we do in the United States of America.  The United States and many other countries are working together on this, looking to invest in connected regional grids to create economies of scale and renewable energy -- economies of scale that are driven by renewable energy.
Last week, we signed an MOU with Trinidad and Tobago to launch a renewable energy research center here in Trinidad and Tobago for the Caribbean writ large.  And we hope to promote clean technologies and energy efficiencies throughout the Caribbean. 
We also discussed citizen security, and I made clear the U.S. approaches this as a shared responsibility.  For the press I would say what my colleagues know, I’ve spent a considerable portion of my public life as Chairman of the Judiciary Committee and Foreign Relations Committee in my years in the United States Senate, fashioning the initiative we had in the ‘80s and the ‘90s with regard to Central Command and its engagement in the Caribbean, as well as Plan Colombia that impacts on -- impacted on the Caribbean at the time -- positively, I might add.
And in the process of that, we discussed approaches that need to be taken and the desire -- I’ll say it bluntly -- the desire for more input, more resources from the United States, because the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we were so successful collectively in the decades of the ‘80s and ‘90s that the preferred route to get to the United States from South America of cocaine and some heroin and other products was no longer through the Caribbean but through the isthmus and up through Central America.
And now, because of the significant initiatives we have with our Central American friends, the concern is legitimately shared by many that they may -- it may move back into the Caribbean in a greater scale than exists now.  And toward that end, we’ve invested more than $30 billion under this administration to reduce drug -- demands for drugs in my country, which would also -- is part of our responsibility and our obligation.
We know that as other nations in the hemisphere make strides against drug trafficking, the threat as I said may increasingly shift back toward the Caribbean.  That’s why in 2009, we launched the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative.  And that’s why, even in a time of tight budgets in my country, we’re increasing our investment, which already stands at over $200 million.
And even as we gather today, our law enforcement agencies are taking part in joint Tradewinds security exercises, hosted by St. Lucia, and also engaged in training exercises in specific countries as well.
In each of these areas -- economics, security, and energy -- the nations of the Caribbean will go further and faster when not only they work -- we work with you, but when they work together. 
You’ve already created, Mr. President, an initiative and an innovative model for regional cooperation by pooling risks to respond to global disasters to -- excuse me -- to natural disasters.  And therefore I think that the whole region is better equipped in the future to deal with these pending problems.
And finally, I want to emphasize that these relationships aren’t just about how our governments interact.  They're about people; they are -- who are constantly traveling between our respective countries; 3.6 million members of a hardworking, Caribbean diaspora call home the United States of America today.  And as a consequence, they send more than $8 billion in remittances back to their home countries in the Caribbean. 
But they're also part of the lifeblood and the dynamism of our communities and our country.  I believe in international relations, as in any relationship, it comes down to respect.  Do we respect one another?  And do we show respect?
For my country, that means reforming our immigration system so the 11 million -- 11 million -- undocumented men, women and many children, who came through no choice of their own, can come out of the shadows and be full participants in American life because they are already in many cases participating and contributing to the growth and prosperity of my country, but required to constantly live in fear and live in the shadows.
It’s about time, and the President and I have been calling for this for a long time, even back in the days when he was a senator and I was in the Senate, it’s about time they're afforded the dignity they deserve. 
And respecting your people who are living in my country is part of how we will show respect for you and for quite frankly all of the Americas.  But it’s not just 11 million people in the shadows from the Americas.  They're from all over the world.  They're from Ireland.  They're from Japan.  They're from Africa.  And it’s about time -- it’s about time we reform the system and afford them the dignity they deserve.
So I want to thank you all for the important discussion, at least important to me, and the very warm welcome, but more importantly the frankness and directness we were able to engage in.  I hope you felt as I did that it was completely open, completely frank and completely straightforward -- even where we disagreed.  That's how friends should treat friends, and we need you.  We need you.  And I hope you’ll find a place in your hearts, in your economies, in your quest for energy, in your quest for societalization of your economies that we can play a part with you.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, again, let me conclude, Madam Prime Minister, by thanking you for the incredible hospitality of your government and the people of Trinidad and Tobago.  And I’ll only say it’s good to be back in Trinidad and Tobago, but I have one regret, but it’s good news for you, I can't stay.  (Laughter.)  I would like very much to stay.
So I’m asking you -- I’m heading to Brazil for several days in our initiatives throughout all of the Americas, I’m asking each of you heads of state, would you please write a note to President Obama telling him it’s critical that I come back to Trinidad and Tobago and then visit each of your islands to stay for at least a couple of weeks.  (Applause.)  I would like very much to do that.  Anyway, thank you for your hospitality.  We have a lot of work to do, and we are anxious to work with you.  Thank you.
END
4:00 P.M. AST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 May 27, 2013
Remarks to the Press by Vice President Biden and Colombian President Santos, Bogota, Colombia
Casa de Nariño
Bogota, Colombia
12:30 P.M. (Local)
 
PRESIDENT SANTOS:  (As interpreted.)  Good afternoon, everyone.  First of all, I would like to warmly welcome Vice President Joe Biden on behalf of the 47 million Colombians.  I would like to welcome his wife and his two granddaughters as well.  And to tell him how pleased all Colombians are with his visit to our country today.
 
Vice President Biden is an old friend of Colombia.  He knows us well and he’s helped us a lot.  I was the finance minister when he was the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and he came here with President Clinton, to launch Plan Colombia.  That was 13 years ago; it will be 13 years in August.  And since then, everybody is aware of the great progress that Colombia has achieved. 
 
And it’s great to see Vice President Biden here as Vice President.  He arrived yesterday with the news of the first agreement that was reached with the FARC in Havana.  And if we are able to wrap up on the five points of our agreement, that would be a very happy ending to the process that began 13 years ago.  That is why I want to deeply thank you, Vice President Biden, for your ongoing support throughout all these phases that Colombia has undergone; a process that has yielded very positive results already.
 
Vice President Biden delivered a speech at the Council of the Americas a few weeks ago, and he repeated a phrase that I want to highlight now.  He said that the United States is looking at Latin America, not in the spirit of what the United States can do for Latin America, but what the United States can do with Latin America.  And I want to home in on that phrase, because that attitude is the right attitude.  And that is the focus that the United States and Colombia have worked on to further our relations during my administration, as partners on equal footing, looking at each other eye to eye and working shoulder to shoulder. 
 
And to me, as a President, and Colombia, it’s a great pleasure to me to say right now that the relations between Colombia and the United States have never been better -- not just because of the passing of the free trade agreement that turned one just a few days ago, but because our agenda is a broad, robust agenda, and it is an agenda that will undoubtedly bring great benefits to both countries. 
 
We had a very fruitful meeting.  We spoke for over two hours, almost two and a half hours, about issues related to energy, education, the environment, trade, of course, security, which is one of the recurring issues on our agenda, although fortunately it’s not the only issue on our agenda.  We also talked about the Pacific Alliance and the meeting that we had with the presidents of Mexico, Chile and Peru last week and the heads of state of an observing country.  And president -- Vice President Biden expressed the willingness of the United States and the desire to be an observer at the Pacific Alliance, and I told him that Colombia would of course support that request and we would submit that to the consideration of the other countries in -- at the council of ministers that will meet in the near future.
 
We also talked briefly about the issue that has been an ongoing issue -- drug trafficking -- not just about the progress that we’ve made jointly, but also about the report that was delivered to me by Dr. Insulza, the OAS Secretary General.  This is a report that we have distributed among the different leaders that attended the Pacific Alliance summit.  We will continue to distribute to academic centers in different European countries.  It will also be presented at the OAS General Assembly at the beginning of the upcoming month.  And it’s a report that will be the foundation of a necessary discussion to look at how we will continue to face this scourge that has affected us all so much and for which we need to undertake our utmost efforts to continue to make progress.
 
And I want to thank you very especially, Mr. Vice President, and your government for the firm and compelling support that you have offered for our accession to the OECD.  I hope that in upcoming days we will have some positive news on that front.  Without your support, this would not have been positive.  We cannot run a victory lap yet, but we can thank you right now because we have seen that firm, unflinching support from the United States for Colombia’s accession to the OECD.
 
Mr. Vice President, you are now traveling to Trinidad and Tobago.  You will meet with the CARICOM countries.  You will then travel to Brazil.  And we would like to thank you as well for the gesture of making your first trip to Latin America as Vice President during this second administration, that you had selected Bogota, Colombia for this.  You have a friend with us.  We see our country as a strategic partner of the United States.  I think that’s the proper interpretation of our relations.  And as we talked this morning, these relations are going through their best time. 
 
But as any other relationship that we have, they can continue to improve, and that is the aim that both countries have with a view to the future. 
 
Welcome, and thank you once again.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you very much, Mr. President.  It’s a great honor to be back with you.  As you know, I’ve been to Colombia from the ‘70s on.  And it’s -- we did have a terrific discussion today, almost two and a half hours.  We had a lot to talk about.  We have an awful lot to talk about.  We have so many common interests.
 
And it’s great in particular to see you again, my friend.  You pointed out -- as the President pointed out, last time I was -- I think we were in Cartagena if I’m not mistaken.  When Plan Colombia was announced, you were finance minister and I was a United States senator.  Now you’re President and I’m Vice President.  It’s obvious who did well.  (Laughter.) 
 
And it’s a genuine pleasure to be back in Colombia.  The last time I came was in 2000, and although we’ve met in the meantime, and I’ve met with your predecessors in the meantime, when I made -- at that time in 2002 -- visits as a passionate supporter, and one who helped draft Plan Colombia in the United States Senate, I saw then with my own eyes the challenges, but I also saw how incredibly resilient and optimistic the spirit of the Colombian people were. 
 
And since then you’ve reclaimed your nation from civil war.  You’ve taken this country further and faster than many dared hope was even possible back then.  Of course, Colombia -- no Colombian needs to be told this story.  You’ve lived it.  But I wanted to take this moment to pay a personal tribute to you and to the people of Colombia for the remarkable, remarkable progress you’ve made just since last I was here.
 
And now as conflicts begin to recede, Colombia is embracing a new mission, and that is locking in your economic and security gains that gave you so much to win and building a just and durable peace.
 
And our relationship has evolved to reflect just that.  I meant what I said when I said it’s long past the time when America looks out and says, what can we do for you?  It is not just with the Colombian people, but the entire hemisphere:  What can we do with other countries in the hemisphere to benefit all of us?
 
In 2010, our President launched a high-level, partnership dialogue focused on social inclusion, human rights, energy, science as well as security.  And just over a year ago as you pointed out, our Colombian free trade agreement went into effect.  It’s a remarkable milestone that today when we meet the main topic is not security, it is economic prosperity.  In the dozen or so times when I was here pre-2000, it always began with security and most times ended with security.
 
Already, the United States exports to Colombia are up 20 percent and Colombia has greater and permanent access to the largest market in the world to export to, and I’m confident that will increase as well.
 
This afternoon I will be visiting a flower farm, and that's -- and remember that used to be a gigantic issue back in the ‘90s.  Well, the truth of the matter is that flower farm now exports half its products to the United States.  Sixty percent of the employees are women, and of these, nearly half are heads of household, families whose lives have changed for the better and -- by this agreement.
 
And personally I want to make clear to the press, I’m going to the flower farm, and I’m mainly going to get my wife some flowers.  I just wanted to make it clear because in my household if I go anywhere near a flower shop, let alone flower farm and don't come home fully armed with flowers, I will have a very unhappy trip to Colombia. 
 
But today President Santos and I talked about how we can continue our work together, advance environmental and labor standards, support small and women-owned businesses, ensure that the dynamism of the Colombian economy touches every region of the country and every family in the country.
 
And the free-trade agreement is just the beginning.  We’ve doubled visa validity from five to 10 years.  As was pointed out, we championed the Colombian accession to the OECD.  We are prepared to talk with Colombia about the TTP.  We are anxious to continue to engage with and integrate the economies of the region.  And it makes sense for everyone.
 
As I said in our meeting, the United States does not look at the progress of any nation or any group of nations as a zero-sum game.  The more that the Alliance of the Pacific prospers, the better for everyone in the region.  The more that we engage with one another, the better for all of us.
 
And we watch with admiration the advances that you have made in the Alliance of the Pacific in opening markets, integrating regional economies so that people can compete globally.  And I give you -- I’d like to extend to you my admiration for in one year the progress you and your fellow presidents have made.
 
But from observation, it appears as though you have grabbed the bull by the horns -- you, the presidents have decided to make this work.  And it’s a lesson for us in a lot of other arenas as well.
 
We’re also working to realize the promise of our energy future together.  We’re sharing our expertise on reasonable extraction of unconventional oil and gas.  We’re working hand in hand with Connect America 2022 to create a regional energy market and ensure that the people across the hemisphere have access to reliable, affordable, ever cleaner, successful -- cleaner sources of electricity.  Simply interconnecting Colombia and Panama will be a major economic benefit to both your countries and the consumers in both countries.  And Colombia has shown leadership in meeting these emerging energy challenges head on.
 
And finally, we focused on security.  I made it clear to President Santos that the United States strongly supports his efforts to achieve historic peace with the FARC.  Just as we supported Colombia’s leaders on the battlefield, we fully support you at the negotiating table, Mr. President.
 
We understand that some real progress appears to have been made yesterday on the agrarian front.  We applaud every advance -- every advance -- that gets Colombians closer to the peace they so richly deserve.  And we look forward to the day when Colombia can fully enjoy a genuine peace dividend.
 
And even as we pursue peace and security at home -- as you pursue peace and security at home, Colombians are already training thousands of law enforcement officers and security officers from over 40 countries since 2009.  What a change.  I spent all my time down here in the ‘80s with us working in the reverse.  You have done a remarkable job, and I commend President Santos for his efforts to continue Colombia’s progress on human rights, strengthening the rule of law and taking the necessary steps to ensure that human rights violations are held -- violators are held accountable in the civilian judicial system.
 
In the darkest days, the United States was proud to support the Colombian people.  And, Mr. President, now in these brighter and brighter days, we’re proud to be associated with you.
 
And, folks, the one thing the President and I agree on is that the promise not only for our relationships but for the hemisphere are close to limitless.  They're close to limitless, and we genuinely believe that if we work together, we can provide what we hope will be the case that -- when the Berlin Wall went down in Europe, we started to talk about a Europe whole and free, which has never occurred.  And now it’s on the verge of being fully realized.  The President and I believe that our children will look to a hemisphere that is middle class, democratic and secure for the first time in the hemisphere’s history.  And with the leadership of men like President Santos I am confident that our children’s future is in very, very good hands.
 
So again, thank you, Mr. President.  And we were commiserating how we used to each have a relatively good golf game before we got the respective positions we’re in.  So since we’re both playing very badly, let’s play together. 
 
Thank you all very much, appreciate it. 
 
END
12:46 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 17, 2013
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Navajo Technical College Commencement *AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY*
Crownpoint, New Mexico
May 17, 2013
Good morning, everyone! 
Ya'aa'tey shi Din'e
It’s wonderful to be here in New Mexico to celebrate such an important day with all of you! 
Thank you, Roselyn, for that very kind introduction.  Dr. Guy, thank you for hosting me here today.
Last night, I had the wonderful opportunity to meet President Shelly and his wife, Martha, and see the students from Dine Bi Olta Elementary School and Miyamura High School perform the basket and ribbon dances.  The dances were beautiful.
Thank you, President Shelly and Council Delegate Simpson for having me today.
All of you graduating today stand on the shoulders of those who came before you - your parents, your grandparents, and all of your ancestors. It is their vision, and their determination that created this community and built this college.
So as we celebrate your accomplishments here today, we also remember and acknowledge their sacrifices to make this all possible.
Navajo Technical College is a special place.  For the second year in a row I know you were recognized by the Aspen Institute as being one of the top 120 community colleges in the United States – in part because of your graduation rate near 80 percent.  That’s amazing!
I know you are also celebrating your first student to graduate with a Baccalaureate Degree this year – congratulations to Dody Begay– who is graduating with his degree in Information Technology!
Some of you know my story. I’ve been a teacher for more than 30 years, and I continue to teach full-time at a community college in Northern Virginia, just outside of Washington, D.C. 
This time of year is always a little bittersweet for me. I’m happy to have finished up another semester and look forward to a little summer break. But I know I’ll be missing my students.
And those feelings – which I’m sure many of your teachers share – are only amplified for those who are graduating.
We are so proud of you. We hope we have given you every bit of advice to help you succeed. And we are excited to see what you’ll do next.
College is a place that changes lives, for the better.  And tribal colleges are especially unique places … particularly for students who might otherwise not have the opportunity to attain a higher education.
Tribal colleges, like community colleges, meet students exactly where they are.
As a community college teacher, I see every day that my students have all made a choice to be there, to be better, to continue their education. 
They have made a choice to be in the classroom, even though they might be working one or two other jobs, juggling child care, and raising families.
My students have made the choice because they believe in themselves.
And we believe in them, too. We stand behind them.
Today, I would like to share a few stories of your fellow graduates and how they embody three important lessons about community and as you move forward in your lives, about your sense of place in the world.
Every story I have heard about your fellow students comes back to this: your community is more than the people around you, it is who you are. 
Many of you know Dwight Carlston. He’s about to graduate with his Associate of Applied Science degree in Environmental Science and Natural Resources.
Growing up, Dwight and his two younger brothers spent a lot of time with their grandparents while their single mom worked two jobs – one at a loan company and another as a bank teller.
There were lots of chores. No electricity. No running water.
Dwight says watching his mom, who didn’t graduate from high school, have to work so hard at all those jobs made him wonder what kind of life was really possible for himself.
One thing he does remember is his grandfather’s stubborn streak, especially when it came to education: his grandsons would go to school.
Dwight didn’t think he had the financial resources necessary to get his higher education.
But with the help of counselors, the cross country runner was able to get a scholarship to attend his first year at another school in Kansas.
But Dwight struggled and dropped out after a year. After working construction jobs, he knew he wanted to try again to complete his education.
For Dwight, Navajo Technical College’s proximity to home and affordability changed his entire learning experience.
Named last year’s Student of the Year, Dwight excelled in and out of the classroom, maintained a 3.8 GPA, served as Student Senate President and ran cross country. More recently, he was elected the Student Congress president of all 38 tribal colleges.
It’s clear his grandfather’s stubborn streak has been passed on.  Now that there is a four-year Bachelor of Science degree available, Dwight plans to continue his education this fall.
I know we’ll hear more from Dwight in the future!
The second lesson is about service to your community.
Many of you come back to your community because you couldn’t imagine being anywhere else. And you come back to your community because you want to continue to serve - serve others as well as they have served you.
Jerrilene Kenneth started her higher education right after high school at a community college in Albuquerque.
Three years in, her father passed away, and in a short time, Jerrilene says she didn’t know what to do with her herself.
She did complete a culinary arts certificate, but eventually dropped out of school.
Jerrilene’s dad had been a mechanic.  So Jerrilene, the youngest of 11, decided to enlist in the Army. 
She went on to serve four years as a mechanic, including two deployments – first to Iraq and then to Afghanistan.
While deployed, Jerrilene says she learned just how much stress one person could survive. After losing her dad, Jerrilene found being away from her family – especially her mom – to be the hardest thing she had ever done.
When Jerrilene came home, she found her place: spending time with her many nieces and nephews, connecting with young people and her community.
She enrolled at Navajo Technical College and graduates today – the first in her family to do so – with an Associate Degree in Early Childhood Education.
Last month, Jerrilene received a gold medal in Early Childhood Education at the SkillsUSA state competition and she will go on to compete in the National Championships.
With her Associate Degree down, Jerrilene says she now hopes to continue on to get her bachelor’s degree to eventually become a teacher. A woman after my own heart!
From cook, to mechanic in Iraq and Afghanistan, to teacher, Jerrilene knows wherever she is in the world helping others learn will be part of her life.
And she also says there is nowhere she would rather be serving than right here, in her own community.
Jerrilene, thank you for your service to our country.
And I know there are two other veterans graduating today as well - Fitzgerald Nez and Eric Begody – could you please stand? Thank you for your service.
The last idea is pretty simple: here, within the Navajo Nation, you found an even deeper level of community at your school.  Here at Navajo Technical College, you found the support that you needed to succeed.
Sherwin Becenti headed for college at the University of New Mexico right out of high school but dropped out after two years.
Sherwin stopped going to classes and pretty soon, felt like he was too far behind to catch up.
That was more than a decade ago.
He worked all kinds of jobs in the intervening time: a bread factory, construction, firefighting.
Then he met his wife, Michelle, who kept encouraging him to go back and finish his education. Michelle is a Navajo Technical College student, too.
Sherwin and Michelle want to provide a good example to their children, Mikaela and Kobe, to know there is a path to a brighter future.
Sherwin – this year’s Student of the Year – wants them to know about the things he never knew about – scholarships, internships, a path toward a better life.
Mikaela is already on her way. She recently completed a rigorous application process to be admitted into the Navajo Preparatory School, where she will start high school this fall.
And her parents couldn’t be more proud.
Sherwin, thank you for the wonderful example you are setting. And, he couldn’t have done it without you, Michelle.  You believed in him!
I would like you all to think back on the lessons you have learned as part of the Navajo Technical College community.
You are people like Dwight, who become lifelong learners and will encourage others to do the same.
You are people like Jerrilene, who are going to become teachers. And, in a few years, she may teach the children of the people sitting next to you.
You are people like Sherwin, who are going to continue to show future generations that there is a bright path ahead.
You all care so deeply about this place that generations of your family have called home.
You all have a stake in each other’s future because you are now and always be part of this shared community.
So continue to reach out to one another, to encourage one another, to lift up each other.
I know that shortly you will hear a new poem from the first Navajo Poet Laureate, Professor Luci Tapahonso.
But I would like to close with the beautiful ending of another of her poems entitled “A Blessing,” which she wrote for another class of college graduates:
“May we fulfill the lives envisioned for us at our birth. May we realize that our actions affect all people and the earth. May we live in the way of beauty and help others in need. May we always remember that we were created as people who believe in one another.
We are grateful, Holy Ones, for the graduates, as they will strengthen our future. All is beautiful again.”
I hope you all take some time today to reflect on all that you have accomplished.
Take time to thank your professors, your fellow students, and most of all, your families for their support along the way.
And celebrate this important milestone with your loved ones.
On behalf of President Obama, the First Lady and the Vice President, my husband Joe – we are so proud of you, and we look forward to all that lies in front of you.
Congratulations! Ahe'hee! 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 16, 2013
Dr. Jill Biden Announces Sarah Baker as Policy Director
Washington, D.C.—The Office of the Vice President today announced that Sarah Baker, who most recently served as Deputy Associate Counsel in the Office of Presidential Personnel, will serve as Dr. Jill Biden’s new Policy Director.  Sarah replaces Kirsten White, who was policy director for the first term and recently returned to practicing law. 
Prior to joining the Administration, Sarah worked at Hogan Lovells US LLP, most recently serving as the United States Senior Associate for the firm’s pro bono department and formerly as a member of the White-Collar Criminal Defense and Government Investigations group. While at Hogan Lovells, she worked on a variety of issues including healthcare fraud, civil rights, housing discrimination, hate speech, and immigration.
She earned her undergraduate degree from Rutgers College and received her J.D. from the University of Virginia School of Law.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 09, 2013
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Military Mother's Day Tea
East Room
4:04 P.M. EDT
  
DR.BIDEN:  Hello, everyone.  Please sit.  Good afternoon, everyone.  Thank you for being here and it’s wonderful to welcome you to the White House.
Many of you know I’m a proud Blue Star mom.  My son, Beau, is a soldier in the Delaware Army National Guard.  So while I’m always honored to be in the presence of our military families, I feel a special bond with other military moms.  I’ll never forget the day that Beau deployed to Iraq.  It was that mixture of pride and concern that military moms know all too well, right?  Having Beau overseas was a tough year for our entire family, but it was especially difficult for my daughter-in-law Hallie, my granddaughter Natalie and our grandson Hunter.
There were a lot of people who stepped up in different ways to support our family that year.  A neighbor shoveled the driveway during a snowstorm.  Our church included Beau’s name in the church bulletin.  And at Natalie’s school, her teacher hung a photo of Beau’s unit on the wall so that everyone would know that Natalie’s daddy was away.  Through the whole experience, these acts of kindness meant so much to them and to us.
While our sons and daughters serve so selflessly having a community share the burden makes all the difference in the world. Today I am here to say thank you for all that you do, for your selflessness and for your sacrifice on behalf of our country.
And now it is my great honor to introduce our First Lady.  Military families have no greater supporter than my friend and partner, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks so much.  Well, everyone, welcome.
Thank you.  Thanks, Jill.  Thanks so much for that gracious introduction.  But, more importantly, thank you for being such a phenomenal military mom and such a spokesperson for military families.  You've been just a great partner in Joining Forces and everything we do.  And I'm just grateful to have you as a friend and as a partner.
Isn't it pretty in here?  (Laughter.)  It really is.  I walked in and was like, oh, my goodness!  And everyone looks so nice.  (Laughter.)  Must be a tea going on here or something like that.  (Laughter.) 
Well, welcome.  I hope you guys are doing good, having fun  -- everything going well.  So far, so good?  That's good.  (Applause.)  Well, we're happy to have you here. 
And I want to start by recognizing a few people.  I want to recognize Patty Shinseki, who is also a dear friend.  Patty, where are you?  Are you here?  Patty is right there.  (Laughter.) Patty, wonderful to see you.  Thank you for being such a tremendous supporter of both Jill and myself, and for all the sacrifices that you make. 
I want to recognize Lilibet Hagel who is here.  Please stand, the both of you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, as well, for your service to this country and for all that you do for Jill and myself as well. 
And I want to take a minute to embarrass somebody in the room, because I have a special person here as well -- a woman who is my rock in so many ways.  I couldn't do what I do every single day if it weren't for this woman.  I just did an interview the other day where somebody asked me what was one of the most important things that my mother taught me -- and I could go on and on and on.  But my mom has taught me most to be a good listener, to be patient, to use common sense.  She has taught me to be open-minded. 
And what she still does for me today is that she will give me endless amounts of time just to talk and talk and talk and talk -- and all she does is listen.  (Laughter.)  That's all she does, is listen.  And sometimes that's all we need. 
So it is my honor to recognize my mommy, Marian Robinson, who is here.  Stand up, Mommy.  (Applause.)  It's Grandma.  (Laughter.) 
And finally, I want to thank all of you for being here today as we celebrate Mother’s Day at the White House.  It's really good.  We're doing it just a little bit early, so get double duty, moms.  (Laughter.)  We get today and we get tomorrow.  Let's stretch this out.  (Laughter.)  We get Saturday, Sunday -- and I think we should just figure out what we need to do on Monday, too.  (Laughter.)  So I think this is a good way to start off the weekend.   
Today, we have some of the most extraordinary moms in the country with us.  We have active duty troops and veterans and military spouses from all across the country.  And we knew we wouldn’t be celebrating motherhood properly if we didn’t have you guys bring along some special guests -- your children -- and some people have brought their own moms as well.  So this is quite a beautiful crew -- and handsome, too.  (Laughter.)  So we are thrilled to have several generations of families here with us today.
We also have a group of very special women who I’d like to take a moment to recognize -- some of the Military Spouses of the Year from each branch of our Armed Forces.  And as I say your name, please stand so that we can recognize you.  Verenice Castillo from the Air Force.  (Applause.)  Stay up.  (Laughter.) I want you to get your moment.  Tara Crooks from the Army.  (Applause.)  Karen Guenther from the Marine Corps.  (Applause.) Shelley Kimball from the Coast Guard.  Alisha Youch from the Navy.  (Applause.)  Where’s Alisha?
DR. BIDEN:  Alisha had another event that she had to race to.  She’s so sad --
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, give her a hug from us.   
And just a couple of hours ago, Alicia Hinds Ward from the National Guard was named the National Military Spouse of the Year for 2013.  Is she here?  There you go -- Alicia.  (Applause.)
Thank you all so much.  We are so proud.  You all are just a reflection of what you know folks like you are doing all over this country.  And it is an honor to have you here.  We are grateful for what you do.  And have a good time.  You can sit down now.  (Laughter.) 
But I'm going to talk a little bit more about our Military Spouse of the Year, Alicia.  Alicia’s story probably sounds pretty familiar to many of you in this room.  She’s a mother of three boys -- ooh, sorry.  (Laughter.)  Her husband is in the Air National Guard here in Washington.  And every day, she finds a way to give back in some way, shape or form -- working to build morale and support family members who are going through deployments, leading monthly forums to educate families about their benefits in the military, distributing book bags to military kids.  And she’s doing it all because, as she says -- and these are here words -- she says, “I believe each of us as the ability to be as phenomenal as we choose or we are given the opportunity to be.  Empower someone and watch them soar.” 
Those are Alicia’s words.  And that’s what military moms do every day.  You all help people soar.  You help our country soar. When somebody needs you, whether it’s your family, or your community, or your country -- you lift them up.  You answer the call every single time.  You find a way to fit that meeting into your calendar -- which is why Alicia is gone -- (laughter) -- or stop by that neighbor’s house on the way home to lend a hand. 
And even though you’ve got families to raise and jobs to do all your own, you never complain.  And Jill and I say this all the time, as we meet with thousands of military families -- you all just never complain.  Never complain.  You just keep moving along, getting it done.
And I hope that you know how much your country appreciates you.  I really hope you do.  I hope that you know that people across America have your backs, from everyone here at the White House and the Department of Defense to CEOs of some of the largest companies in this country, to doctors and college professors and community and faith leaders in cities all over this country -- people are responding to your service with service of their own. 
And that’s why Jill and I -- one of the things that we've seen as we've been working with Joining Forces over these past several years -- every time we’ve issued a call to action on your behalf, whether it’s for jobs or educational opportunities or volunteers to do more for you, Americans have responded overwhelmingly, in such positive ways.  We haven’t had a single person tell us no when we've asked. 
I mean, that's what we've learned.  A lot of times when people don't step up, they don't know -- they don't know what to do.  But when we explain, when we share, when we ask them to do it, they step up.  And I know that's not just because Jill and I are asking.  I mean, we’re cool and everything, but -- (laughter) -- but it’s really because of all of you and everything your families have given to this country. 
So I want you all to know that this country is here for you and your families now and in the years ahead -- because everything we’re doing with Joining Forces isn’t about the Obama administration.  The goal is that this is a forever proposition, that anyone who occupies the White House from now on will take this mission up as a primary focus of everything they do.  All of these changes we hope to be part of the bureaucracy from now on. So that's what Joining Forces is all about, and that's what today is all about.
So we really do want you to make yourselves at home.  When the lights go off and all the cameras leave, it’s just tea with us.  (Laughter.)  Eat all you want.  As I say, have all the cookies you want.  (Laughter.)  Today is the day to forget about Let's Move.  This is the balance part of it.  (Laughter.)  We’ve earned it, moms.  (Laughter.)  We can have our cookies. 
And we’re going to walk out, Jill and I, for a second.  And we’re going to ask all the young people in the room to come with us because we’ve got some surprises for you.  So we’re going to leave, do a little business, and we will be back for a few surprises for you all. 
So, moms, hold tight.  You get a couple of minutes of free babysitting.  (Laughter.)  So any kids who are ready who want to leave and come with us, you guys follow us.  We’re coming.  We’re going to march on out.  Let’s go.
  * * * * *
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, surprise!  (Laughter.)  You guys, your kids will be coming in, they're going to find their places.  They've been working so hard on some special surprises.  You all, please, be seated. 
Well, it is my honor to welcome Prince Harry to the White House today.  As you all might know, Prince Harry is a Captain in the Army Air Corps in the British Armed Forces.  (Applause.)  In January, he returned from his second deployment to Afghanistan, and for the past few years he has focused on honoring the sacrifice and service of our veterans and military families, especially now that the war in Afghanistan is drawing to a close.
He has spent much of his time supporting our wounded warriors and the families of our fallen.  And this weekend -- absolutely.  (Applause.)  And this weekend, he will be attending the fourth annual Warrior Games in Colorado Springs. 
So we are absolutely thrilled that he could be with us today, that he took the time.  He just arrived in D.C. and only has a limited time with us because he has a very busy schedule.  But when he heard about this tea and all of you -- as I said, when people know about you and the sacrifices you make, they want to be a part of it -- he wanted to be here to personally thank you for your service. 
So we are going to head into the Blue Room -- Jill, Prince Harry and myself -- and we're going to take time to greet each one of you.  So Prince Harry is going to stay as long as he can, and our goal is to get through everyone.  But as soon as he -- whenever he has to leave we'll pull him out, and Jill and I will be here to the very end.
So Happy Mother's Day.  (Applause.)  I hope you guys enjoyed yourselves, and we'll see you inside.  (Applause.)
END 
4:49 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 April 30, 2013
Remarks by the President, The Vice President, The First Lady, Dr. Jill Biden, and Petty Officer David Padilla at Joining Forces Employment Event
East Room
    11:46 A.M. EDT
  THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you all very much.  My name is Joe Biden, I’m Jill Biden’s husband.  (Laughter.)  And it’s a delight to be here with all of you.
  Secretary Shinseki, Becky Blank, who is the acting Commerce Secretary, all -- we have Seth Harris here, who is the acting Labor Secretary.  And, Admiral, good to see you, man.  Look at all the brass here.  There’s no reason why we all shouldn’t be here.
  Look, folks, the truth of the matter is that we’re delighted to welcome you to the White House, but all the business leaders, military leaders, it’s great to have you here -- and veterans.
  But the truth is we all should be here.  We all should be in this spot at this time because there’s so much work to do.  My colleagues are tired of hearing me say over the last 20 years, we only have one truly sacred obligation in this country.  We have a lot of obligations -- to our children, to the elderly, to the poor.  But there’s only truly sacred obligation in my view, and that's to equip those we send to war and care for those who come home from war and their families.  That's a sacred obligation.
  This post-9/11 generation -- and I see some folks out there -- well, no one is quite my age.  (Laughter.)  But I see folks out there from the Vietnam generation on, and before.  All made incredible contributions, but this 9/11 generation has been astounding.  Over 3.4 million young women and men have joined our military since 9/11, with almost the certain knowledge that they're likely to be deployed overseas.  1.7 million of those brave women and men have walked across those scorching sands of Iraq or those barren mountains in Afghanistan.  And many of them, as all of you know -- and some of you are among them, including some of the brass here -- didn't just serve once or twice.  Some have served three and four and five deployments.  Pretty incredible.
  Every day I get a card, and on my schedule card I have them listed on the back -- and, thanks to the Pentagon, we call every day.  I want to know exactly how many lives have been lost and exactly how many people -- how many of our brave soldiers, Marines, Guardsmen, et cetera, how many have been wounded.  As of today, 6,564 have died in those conflicts; 50,651 have been wounded.  And like all of you, I count the one.
  I know how we would have felt if, God forbid, something happened to our son when he was there a year and someone said, by the way, there are around 6,000 who have died, or there are about 65,000 who have been wounded.  Every single one of these women and men have families, have a story and a future, and many of them still have a future.
  So this obligation is real, and it’s going to be lasting, and it’s consequential.  The truth of it is these veterans coming home into civilian life are among the most qualified men and women that have ever served our military because of these men up here -- how they -- and women, how they’ve trained them.  They're among the most qualified technically, intellectually.  They're among the most qualified Americans that have ever been available for the job market.  They have the capacity to do virtually any job in the private sector. 
  You're going to hear from a young man soon who, I will not steal his thunder, but works in an industry where they move a lot of equipment and freight around.  I remember talking to someone at one of these big companies and saying, well, I don't know about so and so; he was talking about a young man.  And I said, man, this kid handled more responsibility and billions dollars' worth of equipment than you own, than you’ll ever own.  (Laughter.)  So don't tell me this kid can't handle the dispatching yard of your trucks.  One of the vehicles he had cost more than all your trucks.  (Laughter.)  
  And, seriously, think of these kids.  Go to an aircraft carrier.  Watch who is making the judgment as to when that jet aircraft lands down.  It’s a 19-, 20-year-old kid standing there with a flag.  It’s a 19-, 20-year-old kid -- they even let me do it once -- (laughter) -- that sits underneath that as they catapult off.  They can handle anything.  They're technologically proficient.  They're totally responsible.  And they’re undeniably capable.  
  So what we’re selling here today -- and all of us are selling it -- is an incredible product.  And I want to thank so many of you business leaders here today behind me and out in the audience for recognizing that fact.
  As the President said, no one who fights for this country overseas should have to come home and fight for a job when they come back home.  They just shouldn’t have to do that.  And that's what you’re all about.  That's what we’re about. 
  But it’s not just about the returning veterans.  We know there are families, and particularly you men and women in uniform know the sacrifices your families make to allow you to serve.  The English poet John Milton once said, “They also serve who only stand and wait.”  And literally, hundreds of thousands, millions of wives, husbands, sons, daughters, mothers, fathers -- they’ve stood and waited.  And we owe them as well, because they have served as well.  
  And quite frankly, I’ve never seen my wife, Jill, so absolutely, totally committed to any cause, and that's the cause of serving military families, the cause of serving all of you who served.  I’ve heard her say it once, I’ve heard her say it over the last seven years I don't know how many times:  Everyone, everyone can do something.  Only 1 percent of the population is serving, but 90 percent of the population -- 99 percent owes them just a simple act of kindness.
  I remember how moved we were when we got a call from our daughter-in-law after a snowstorm the winter our son was deployed.  The next-door neighbor just walked over and shoveled the driveway -- just shoveled the driveway.  Never said a word, packed up, left.  Shoveled the driveway.  We’ve got a lot of driveways to shovel.  We owe an awful lot.  
  And that's why Michelle and Jill started Joining Forces, and why, with the absolute rock-solid commitment of President Barack Obama behind them, they’ve done, with your help, a remarkable job.  I’m sure you’ll hear the numbers and you will all know the remarkable job that you’ve done and they’ve done responding to the needs of these brave women and men.
  And now I’d like to introduce you to a woman whose father served, whose sons serve, and who serves us every day -- Jill Biden, Dr. Jill Biden, who happens to be my wife.  (Applause.) 
  DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Joe.  Hi, everyone.  I’m Jill Biden, a proud Blue Star mother.  
  Over the past few years, the First Lady and I have had the incredible honor of meeting military spouses all over this country, and I’m always amazed by their strength, their commitment, and, most importantly, by their resilience.
  These are spouses like Erin Voirol.  Erin met her husband, Dale, a Sergeant First Class in the Army, when they were both in high school.  Not long after becoming an Army wife, Erin found herself overseas with two young children.  Soon thereafter, her husband deployed for a year.  That was just the beginning.  
  Over the past 18 years, they have moved their family 10 times.  They are raising three children with Erin providing primary care of the kids during three deployments, each for more than a year.  And today, Dale is stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina while Erin and their children stayed in the Hampton Roads area in Virginia so that their kids can finish high school there.  
  Through all this, Erin pursued her own education, made strong connections with other military spouses, and embraced a wide range of careers, all leading to her current profession of serving other military families.  Erin is the operations manager for two non-profits that provide employment readiness and job-placement assistance for veterans, military spouses, and more.
  Erin is here with us today.  Erin, would you stand.  Thank you, Erin, for all you do.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
  Yet stories like Erin’s are not unique among military spouses.  They are people who, when their spouse deploys, are carrying our military families, doing the work of two parents, raising children, running a household.  And military spouses are the first to step up for their communities, whether it’s volunteering to help out a neighbor or serving in the PTA.  All the while they’re building their own careers.  
  And because our nation’s military spouses move 10 times more than their civilian counterparts, that’s not always easy.  Just as they’re settled into a new job, it might be time to pack up again, move across the country or out of the country, and start the entire process all over again.
  But of all the things Michelle and I have learned about military spouses, here’s what stands out the most:  They never complain.  Whatever the situation, they keep on serving, doing whatever needs to be done.  Military spouses like Erin have so much to offer -- their skills, their incredible work ethic, and perhaps most of all, their endless energy.  
  That’s why nearly two years ago, we were proud to launch the Military Spouse Employment Partnership.  This effort has helped spouses build strong resumes, has sponsored hiring fairs and has created mentoring programs.  Since its launch, more than 160 Fortune 500 employers have signed on to the partnership, and more than 43,000 military spouses have been hired.  And more and more companies are finding ways to keep these spouses in their employment, even after they move.  And I’m sure every partnership company will say, if you’re looking for dynamic, resourceful, and highly skilled employees, our military spouses are exactly who you are looking for.  
  As Joe mentioned just a moment ago, our military spouses serve right along our servicemen and women.  Through Joining Forces, we honor all military service and we ask all Americans to join us in finding ways to show our gratitude.  From the beginning, the private sector has played an important part in supporting the Joining Forces initiative.  
  Our next speaker is a veteran who has benefited from this private sector involvement.  It is my great pleasure to introduce David Padilla, who served in the United States Navy for five years as a second-class petty officer operations specialist.  And he has a new four-month-old daughter -- month, right?  Four-month-old.  David, thank you for your service to our country.  (Applause.)
  PETTY OFFICE PADILLA:  Good morning.  My name is David Padilla.  I served honorably for the United States Navy as an operations specialist second-class petty officer.  I served in two deployments -- first, as a database manager in Operation Iraqi Freedom, and second, as an air controller and watch supervisor on an AFRICOM partnership for countries such as Kenya and the Congo.  
  My time in the Navy taught me invaluable skills:  How to manage a team, work with data, and operate high-tech equipment -- not to mention all the discipline and hard work that comes with wearing that uniform.  But when I came home and started my job search, it felt like companies didn’t see any of that in me.  
  After returning from the Navy, I applied to countless jobs and was averaging two interviews a week, but nothing ever materialized.  So with the help of the GI Bill, I enrolled at Mercy College in New York where I earned a bachelor’s degree in finance.  Just after I graduated, my fiancée discovered she was pregnant with our beautiful daughter, Emiliana (ph), who is now four months old.  I knew that with a growing family, I needed to double down on my job search, even with a bachelor’s degree.  So I signed up for veterans’ workshops, updated my resume, and attended dozens of job fairs.  But still, I struggled to find work.  
  In all, I was unemployed for two and a half years before and after college.  But then, thanks to Paralyzed Veterans of America and their PAVE program, which provides support to all veterans who are looking for work, UPS hired me as a dispatch supervisor where I could use my management training I received from the Navy.  And after only four months on the job, UPS recognized my leadership skills and promoted me, where I’m responsible now for dispatching 75 drivers and optimizing our delivery schedule.  
  UPS has given me the opportunity to build my career and provide financial support for my family.  I want to thank UPS and CEO Scott Davis, who is here today, for giving me this opportunity and making veteran-hiring a priority.  And I also want to salute all the companies here today who are making hiring veterans and their spouses a priority.  I only hope that more companies stand up for families like mine.
  No one understands this better than our Commander-in-Chief and First Lady.  They have both made it their mission to support our troops, veterans and military families.  And now, I have the great pleasure to introduce them now.  
  Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome our President, Barack Obama, and First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
  THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Please, everybody have a seat.  David, thank you so much for your introduction and sharing your story, but most importantly, thanks for your extraordinary service to our nation.  We are very, very proud of you.  
  Thank you to our partners in crime -- (laughter) -- the outstanding Joe Biden, and the even more outstanding Jill Biden.  (Laughter and applause.)  We're grateful for their leadership, their commitment on a whole range of issues.  But I'm particularly grateful for the passion that Jill, you've shown when it comes to our military families, because you know what it’s like when a loved one is deployed.  And that passion comes through with everything you do.  So we're very, very proud of you. 
  I also want to recognize the members of my Cabinet and Joint Chiefs and some of our top brass who are here.  We appreciate all the great work that they're doing.  And your presence reflects our commitment to this cause across the entire government.  
  And now, I've got a simple task this morning, and that is to introduce the graceful, brilliant, inspiring love of my life -- (laughter) -- First Lady Michelle Obama.  Joe and I are just warm-up acts today, which in our families means it’s just another Tuesday.  (Laughter.)  That's how it generally goes.    
  But of all the honors and privileges of serving as President, the opportunity to meet incredible people like David is among the things that I cherish the most.  David, being here today is representative of a 9/11 generation -- men and women who volunteered to put the uniform on even though they understood it was wartime, knowing full well they could be sent into harm’s way.  
  And for more than a decade, they have answered every call, executing some of the most dangerous missions on the planet; operating some of the most cutting-edge, complex technologies known to man; leading their peers in moments where their decisions can determine life or death.  And, as we saw during the attacks in Boston, as Guardsmen and as veterans were racing towards danger, they put that courage and experience and skills that they’ve earned serving in our military to use every single day.  George Washington once said, “When we assumed the soldier, we did not lay aside the citizen.”
  Our troops and our military families who serve right alongside them keep us strong and they keep us safe.  And as Commander-in-Chief, I’ve pledged that just as they’ve left their homes and families to take care of us, we've got to make sure we're taking care of them when they come home.  That’s our sacred obligation:  To make sure that they get the care and the benefits and opportunities that they deserve.  And that includes economic opportunity -- good jobs worthy of their incredible talents.  
  And as David indicated, unfortunately, when they hit the job market, employers don’t always recognize the high-quality, high-tech skills our newest veterans have gained in the military.  They don't understand the leadership that they've shown under extraordinary circumstances.  So, too often, just when these men and women are looking to move forward in the next chapter of their lives, they’re stuck in neutral, scraping together odd jobs just to pay the bills.  
  Now, our economy is growing.  It's creating jobs on a consistent basis.  Although I just had a press conference -- we could be doing even better if we'd get a little more cooperation down the street.  But for post-9/11 veterans, employment continues to lag behind the national average -- and that's especially true for our youngest veterans.  And this does not make any sense.  
  If you can save a life on the battlefield, then you sure as heck can save one in an ambulance in a state-of-the-art hospital.  If you can oversee a convoy of equipment and track millions of dollars of assets, then you can run a company’s supply chain or you can balance its books.  If you can lead a platoon in a war zone, then I think you can lead a team in a conference center.   
  There are lots of extremely talented young people who are more than qualified for the jobs that businesses are looking to fill.  We've got the end of the Iraq war.  The war in Afghanistan is drawing to a close.  More than 1 million servicemembers are going to be transitioning back to civilian life in the coming years.  So we've got to do everything we can to make sure they have every opportunity to succeed.  
  That’s why, a year and a half ago, I signed new tax credits for companies that hire unemployed veterans and Wounded Warriors.  And since then, the number of veterans hired through tax credits like these has more than doubled.  And my budgets proposed extending these tax credits permanently.  Congress needs to get that done.  
  We’re working to help our troops earn the credentials they need for jobs in manufacturing and medicine and transportation.  We strengthened the Post-9/11 GI Bill, helping nearly 1 million veterans and military family members get a college education.  And for the first time in 20 years, we've overhauled the military’s Transition Assistance Program to help our newest veterans compete for those private sector jobs.  Our online Veterans Jobs Bank now has more than 2.5 million searchable job postings.  With our Veterans Gold Card, our veterans receive six months of personalized career counseling.  At my direction, the federal government has hired nearly 250,000 veterans. 
  So we've made progress, but we know that government alone can't put every veteran and military spouse to work.  So about a year and a half ago, I went down to the Navy Yard and issued a challenge to America’s businesses:  Hire or train 100,000 veterans and military spouses by the end of 2013.  And I am proud to say that these companies stepped up.  And some of those companies are represented here today.  
  In just a year, businesses had already hired 125,000 veterans or military spouses.  They committed to hiring 250,000 more.  Today, we’re announcing a major milestone in this effort, thanks in large part to the leadership of so many companies that are represented here today.  And we could not be more grateful for the commitments of these companies.  
  Now, they're doing it partly because it's good business sense, because they're getting great employees.  But they're also doing it because they're patriots.  They're also doing it because they really care about this country and they understand that they don't succeed unless they've got an incredible military that's doing this. 
  Hiring our veterans and military spouses is not just the patriotic thing to do, it's the smart thing to do.  They're looking for highly skilled workers.  Highly skilled veterans and military spouses are looking for jobs, let’s connect them up.  It’s good for families, it’s good for businesses, it’s good for our country.  
  And that’s why Joining Forces is so important.  It’s a way for us to both honor and serve the men and women who have served us so well, but also to move the country forward.  That’s why we've all got to step up and do our parts -- government, business, schools, hospitals, community groups, houses of worship, neighbors, and obviously our military and our VA.  We've had to up our game, and we're not there yet, but we continually try to strive to improve to make sure we're doing the right thing.  And just as service and sacrifice defines our military families, serving our military families has to define who we are as Americans.  
  Now, none of this could have happened had it not been for the extraordinary work that Michelle and Jill have engaged in over the last two years.  And that’s a call that we're renewing here today.  I've got to tell you, I'm proud of my wife all the time.  I could not be prouder of the work that she and Jill have done in this effort.  They have put their heart and their soul into it, they care about it deeply.  They identify so deeply with these military families because they understand the sacrifices that they're making.  
  So with that, let me introduce a woman who I've seen live out that message every day as a wife and a mother, a tireless champion of military families, love her dearly -- my wife, First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
  MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks so much.  (Applause.)  Thank you all.  Well, let me start by thanking the President of the United States for that nice introduction.  (Laughter.)  It's always nice to get a good introduction from the President, and from your husband.  But I want to thank you and Joe, because truly, we could not issue these challenges without leadership from the top.  And that’s something that Jill and I always say, is that we're out there on the front lines pushing this initiative, but the only way we get this done is because we've got strong leadership in our President and our Vice President.  
And, of course, to Jill, who is not just an extraordinary partner but a wonderful friend in this endeavor, not just working with our military families but in this interesting life that our husbands have gotten us into.  (Laughter.)  Jill is a true champion, and she's taught me a lot about what it means to serve, what it means to be part of the military community.  And I couldn’t be more grateful.
  I also want to recognize all of the leaders from the administration, from the military and throughout the country, especially the veterans and military spouses who are here with us today.  Thank you all for your commitment and your service to this nation.  
  And finally, I want to take a moment to say a special thank you to someone who didn’t know I was going to thank him, but who has been a cornerstone of this effort throughout this year in a difficult time -- when we've been in transition -- these two were running for something -- (laughter) -- but we couldn’t have kept this effort going without Captain Todd Veazie.  (Applause.)  And, believe it or not, today is Todd's last day as our Joining Forces executive director.  That’s another miracle -- the fact that we get so much done with sporadic support like Todd's.
  And I want to make that point, because it's not just Jill and I, but Todd and a small team of others really keeps this going.  And this year has been a success because of you, so we decided as a reward, we would have you, as your last hurrah, to plan an event with every single one of your bosses -- (laughter) -- because we knew you could pull it off, because that’s what Navy SEALs do, right?  
  But in Todd, we saw his skill, determination on display every single day.  And I'm just so proud.  We'll miss you here with Joining Forces.  So Todd and I just wanted to say thank you -- or, Barack and I wanted to say thank you.  (Laughter.)  You.  You, too.  (Laughter.)  At least I caught that one.  (Laughter.)  But we are grateful and impressed by your talent, integrity, and the incredible work ethic that you've shown to make this possible.  Todd!  (Applause.)  Very bashful.  We kept that out of the remarks so that you wouldn’t know that it was there.  
  But really, the same thing can be said -- all those wonderful traits in Todd -- can be said of all the servicemembers and military spouses we have had the honor of meeting over these past four years.  These men and women are some of the most talented, accomplished, dedicated people you will ever meet. 
  And that’s why, two years ago, when the four of us came together to launch Joining Forces right here in this very room, our goal was to create an initiative that was worthy of their character and their service.  We challenged every segment of our society to stand up and take action and make a real commitment to support and serve our military families.  And since then, this nation has truly joined forces in so many amazing ways. 
  We have seen doctors and nurses take bold new steps to care for the families affected by PTSD and traumatic brain injuries.  We’ve seen colleges sign up to train teachers to be more responsive to the needs of our military children in their classrooms.  We’ve seen community groups and houses of worship and citizens from every walk of life show their appreciation for our military families, not just with words but with deeds. 
  And today, we are here to recognize the tremendous efforts of businesses all across the country.  Together, we have been partnering to do everything in our power to help our veterans and military families find the jobs they need and deserve.  
  These efforts are about so much more than a paycheck.  This is about giving these men and women a source of identity and purpose.  It’s about providing thousands of families with financial security, and giving our veterans and military spouses the confidence that they can provide a better future for their children.  
  So as we reflect on our accomplishments to date and challenge ourselves to do more, it’s important to remember what’s at stake with all this.  It’s important to remind ourselves every single day what this employment effort is really all about.  
  And that’s exactly what we did two years ago when the President issued this challenge.  Because every time we looked at those veterans’ unemployment numbers, every time we heard another story about someone who had taken incoming fire on a combat patrol but couldn’t get an HR rep to take their calls, every time we talked to a military spouse who had been transferred far too many times to build a decent career, we became even more determined to make this right. 
  So with that challenge, we all snapped into action.  And since then, it seems like every week -- quite frankly, every day -- someone new gets involved in this effort.  There hasn’t been a "no" from anyone.  And today, I am thrilled to announce that in less than two years, America’s businesses have hired or trained 290,000 veterans and military spouses -- (applause) -- which is almost triple the original goal with eight months to spare. 
  And we are also proud to announce that American companies have committed to hire or train another 435,000 of these men and women over the next five years.  (Applause.)  And we are so grateful to all of the business leaders here today who are a part of this effort.  
  These commitments come from companies of every shape and size.  BNSF Railroad is hiring 5,000 veterans in the next 5 years.  UPS, hiring 25,000.  Home Depot, 55,000.  McDonald’s is hiring 100,000 in the next three years.  Deloitte is doubling its veterans hiring over the next three years.
  USAA is pledging that 30 percent of its new hires will be veterans or military spouses.  Walmart is telling any veteran who has served honorably that if they want a job in the year after they separate from service, Walmart is going to hire them.  And their goal is to do it within 30 days of the veteran’s application.
  The Blackstone Group has challenged each of its 50,000 hiring managers at affiliated businesses to hire at least one more veteran.  AT&T is creating an online, military exchange for a group of businesses so that if one company can't hire a veteran at that moment, they can connect them to someone who can.
  The International Franchise Association has helped more than 4,300 veterans own their own businesses since 2011.  And right now as we speak, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce is holding its 400th career fair since last March, fulfilling a commitment that it made to us a year ago.
  So we are thrilled with all the new, innovative ideas and we’re in awe of the meaningful employment commitments.  But ultimately, these companies aren’t just committing to a number –- they’re committing people, people like David.  Right here in this room, there are so many stories like his.  So I’d like to take just a moment to tell a few of these stories.  And as I call your name, I want you to stand and remain standing. 
  Staff Sergeant Shaun Murphy, please stand.  Shaun is an eight-year Army veteran who transitioned to become a sixth-grade special-ed teacher in Delaware for three years.  (Applause.)  A little shout-out to Delaware.  He’s working for Teach For America, and today, he has been promoted to lead Teach For America’s nationwide effort to hire more veterans as teachers -- yes, indeed.  He’s doing it all because, as he said, “When you hang up those fatigues and put those boots away, you don’t want to feel like you’ve given up your sense of service.”  
  And then there’s Staff Sergeant Courtney Beard.  (Applause.)  Courtney has served in the New Jersey Air National Guard for six years, including a deployment in Iraq.  But when she’s not serving on active duty, she’s putting her skills as an intelligence analyst to use at Cisco as a network consulting engineer -- small, but tough.  (Laughter.)  And really smart.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  
  And then there’s Chryssy Johnson, who is on stage with us.  Chryssy is a mother and an Army wife from San Antonio.  Her family has been transferred three different times over nine years, leaving Chryssy scrambling for jobs at restaurants or call centers or beauty counters.  But USAA gave her a shot to build a career, and today, she is a financial -- a senior financial foundations specialist on her way to earning her MBA.  Yes.  (Applause.)   
  And then there’s Sergeant Erick Varela.  Erick served in combat infantry for the 82nd Airborne Division, and was deployed two times to the Middle East.  But when he came home to California in the middle of the housing crisis, Erick couldn’t find a job.  And soon, he and his wife found themselves homeless.  
But fortunately, Erick was accepted in an electrical apprenticeship program in San Francisco.  And even though he and his wife were living out of his pickup truck at that time, Erick was able to pinch enough pennies to buy enough gas to drive to and from that class and finish that program.  And today, he’s employed full-time at PG&E, even taking on leadership roles within his crew.  And now, Erick is hoping to buy a home for their growing family.  And we are so proud.  (Applause.)
  These veterans and military families are talented, resilient, disciplined, and they are ready to do the job no matter what it takes.  And these characteristics connect every single veteran and military spouse in this room.  So I’d like to ask all of our veterans and military spouses here today to please stand if they are able so we can give you all a round of applause.  (Applause.)  Thank you all so much.  
  Stories like these are not just in this room, but they’re all around us.  Across America and around the world, our men and women in uniform and their families are standing up for us.  They’re standing up for our values, our security, our communities.  And in so many ways, all they’re looking for is another way to serve.  All they need is that next mission.  All they need is a job.  
  So, to every business leader in this room and throughout the country, I just want you to remember these stories every single day.  Think about all of the skills these men and women possess, all the people they've led, all the risks they've taken and sacrifices they've endured for us.  And then I want you to ask yourselves, what more can you do for these men and women -- what more can you do?  
  If you own a small business, can you commit to hiring a few veterans, maybe even just one?  If you own a larger company, can you hire a few hundred, maybe a few thousand?  Can you retain the veterans already in your workforce so that they are able to grow within your company?  Can you team up with other businesses to hire more veterans all across this country?
  And again, I just want to reiterate that my husband and I, we're in this with you.  Jill and Joe, we're in this with you.  We're going to keep working to do what we can to develop new programs and partnerships at the federal level that can help you all put these men and women to work even faster.  Because while we're proud of how far we've come, we know that today is not the finish line.  Today is simply just a mile marker, and we're not going to stop until every single veteran or military spouse that is searching for a job has found one.
  These men and women have stood up for us again and again and again.  So now the question is, will we do the same for them?  And everything that we have seen in these past two years gives me confidence that the answer is absolutely yes.  You live in a grateful nation, and people will stand up.  
  So to all the business leaders, I just want to say thank you all.  Thank you for getting us this far.  And to the veterans and military families here in this room and around the country, thank you, again.  We can't thank you enough for your courage and your service.  We will stand with you now and for decades to come.
  Thank you all.  God bless.
    END
12:30 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 February 25, 2013
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden to National Governors Association
State Dining Room


10:40 A.M. EST

DR. BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)  Thank you, David, for that kind introduction.  And thank you all for coming this morning.  It was great to see you all last night.  And wasn’t Audra McDonald incredible?  (Applause.)  

So we’re delighted to have you here at the White House again this morning.  And the last time we were together, Michelle and I talked to you about one of our top priorities of our initiative Joining Forces, which I’m sure you all know about, which is our way to honor and support our troops, veterans and military families.

And we talked about one of the top concerns that we hear about from military spouses wherever we go, and that's professional licensing.  So I’m sure you remember this from last year, many of you do who were here.  

And our nation’s military spouses move 10 times more than their civilian counterparts, and 35 percent of those spouses have jobs that require a professional license.  So they're our teachers, our nurses, our social workers.  And we heard from a teacher -- this is just one of the instances -- who had 10 years' experience in her specialty in one state, and then when she moved to another state, she had to wait because the exam only took place twice a year.  So she lost a lot of time and actually a lot of income because she had to wait.  And then we met a nurse who moved 10 times during her husband’s service and needed to go through a different and complicated process every time she moved.  

So these are just a few of the countless stories we’ve heard that illustrate what a challenge license portability really is for our military spouses.

Back in February of last year when we met with you, only 11 states had pro-spouse legislation.  So the First Lady and I asked you for your help, and you’ve stepped up.  Yes.  (Applause.)  And you stepped up because you appreciate how much our military families do for our country every single day.  And just last month, Arkansas became the 28th state to pass legislation.  

In just one year we’ve made tremendous progress, and the First Lady and I are really appreciative of your efforts.  But there’s still more to do.  Right now we’re thankful that we have 13 more states that already have introduced legislation and are headed in the right direction.  So if your state has a small active-duty population, you might think that this issue may not impact you, but every state has a National Guard or Reserve.  And with so many families -- military families transitioning out of the military now and in the next few years, they’ll be focused on finding good jobs, good schools and good communities, whether there is a military base nearby or not.

So for the sake of our military families, it’s important that all 50 states get this done.  And passing these laws is just the first step.  We hope all of you will reach out to your bases and your National Guard and Reserve communities, talk with the military spouses -- I’m sure many of you already do this already -- and make sure that these laws are working for our military families.

So thank you for helping ease the burden for our military spouses and you’ve all done so much in all of your states.  So again, thank you for all that you’ve done already.

And now I’d like to introduce someone who has been working tirelessly for military families, someone who would like to tell you about our next effort.  You didn't think you were coming here without an ask, right?  (Laughter.)  So to make sure that all of our military families have good family -- good family-supporting jobs, so I’d like to introduce our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)

MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks so much.  (Applause.)  Thank you all.  Good morning.  Thank you.  I hope you all got some rest after last night.  We had a good time -- little tired.  (Laughter.)  If you noticed, I stayed up a little bit later -- (laughter) -- a little bit longer than I had anticipated, but it was well worth it.  But it's good to have you back this morning.

I want to thank Jill, once again, for that introduction, but more importantly for being such a tremendous partner on our Joining Forces initiative.  She's brought her level of passion and focus to this.  We could not be where we are without somebody like Jill who knows these issues, who lives them as a Blue Star mom every day.  So I want to thank her.  But I also want to echo -- absolutely.  (Applause.)  

And to echo Jill, I want to start by thanking all of you for the incredible work that you have done on the effort of spousal licensing.  I mean, it's truly a tremendous effort to go from 11 states to all but 13 states having gotten that done.  And as I was talking to Governor Christie and others, this isn't an issue that people don’t want to work on, it's just a matter of governors being aware of what's going on in their states.  And the truth is, is that once you know, so many of you have stepped up because we all want the best for our troops, our veterans, and for their families.

Your leadership has been truly phenomenal, and it just goes to show the power that states and governors have to make a difference for our troops, veterans and our families.  But, like Jill said, our work here is far from finished.  And I'm not just talking about licensing for our military spouses, I'm also talking about supporting our men and women in uniform as more and more of them make that transition back to civilian life.  

And as my husband announced during the State of the Union address, 34,000 troops are going to be coming home from Afghanistan in the next year.  And that -- yes, that’s a good thing.  (Applause.)  And that war will be over by the end of 2014.  So in the coming years, more than 1 million servicemembers -- 1 million of them -- will make the transition to civilian life.  I mean, just think about that impact -- a million men and women hanging up their uniform, trying to figure out what's next, and doing everything they can to make that change as seamless as possible for all of their families.

So the fact is that while this time of war may be ending, the truth is that our responsibilities to our troops and their families will really just be ramping up.  And that’s what I want to talk with you all about today -- how we can fulfill what is perhaps our most pressing responsibility to our troops.  And that is to make sure that when they come home after serving and stepping up on our behalf, that they can find a job -- and not just any job, but a good job, the kind of job that they can raise their families on.  Now, some of this work has already begun.  Last summer, my husband created a taskforce to help our servicemembers obtain the national certification that they need to help fill high-demand civilian jobs starting with the manufacturing industry.  

And today, we are excited to announce that we’re expanding this effort to the state level to focus on the health care and transportation industries.  So the idea is simple.  Many of you are working on these issues already.  If a servicemember has spent years treating wounded troops in a military hospital, they shouldn’t have to then spend thousands of dollars to get back into the classroom and study things that they've already learned just to get the same kind of job in the civilian world.  We want to make it easier for those who served as medics or drivers in the military to get new jobs as paramedics and nurses and physician assistants or truck drivers.

And since the credentials and licenses for those jobs are issued through the states, that means that all of you as America's governors have a very unique responsibility and opportunity to address this issue.  We know that right now our men and women in uniform face all kinds of obstacles before they can put their skills to use at home.  These men and women have spent thousands of hours in combat zones, saving lives amid explosions and gunfire.  They've driven armored vehicles thousands of miles on dangerous roads lined with IEDs.  Yet, back here at home they can't get hired to drive a semi or serve as an EMT.

So take the example of Maria Aliftiras.  She spent eight years as a medic in the Army Reserves -- eight years.  But when she left the Reserves, she had to take 1,200 hours of courses and clinical work to get her civilian paramedics license.  And she said that hundreds of those hours, about half of the coursework she had to take, was spent reviewing skills she had already mastered.  

And then there is former Navy Corpsman Eric Smith, who was once in charge of a 20-bed intensive care unit in San Diego.  After that, he served two tours in Iraq as a combat medic for a Marine infantry unit.  But when he came home, he couldn't get hired in a medical clinic.  So he had to take up odd jobs.  He had to serve as a bartender, do some day work.  And at one point, he even had to sign up to be a test patient for a drug study just to make enough money to get by.  And as he put it -- and these are his words -- he said, "In the civilian world, my military education and training did not translate because I didn't have a piece of paper saying that it did."  So we all have to think about that.  Because of a piece of paper, because our credentialing processes don't adequately reflect the skills and expertise our troops have gained serving this country, putting their lives on the line -- troops like Petty Officer Smith end up tending bar instead of saving lives.

But, fortunately, again, all of you have the power to make this right.  As we have seen on the spousal licensing issue, there are a number of ways that you as governors can help put our troops back to work without lowering a single professional standard in your states, because that's something we talked about.  This is not about lowering standards.  We've done this for our troops with manufacturing skills, and hundreds of them have earned advanced certifications already.  So now it’s time to get them back to work in the medical and transportation fields as well, and to do it right away.

So our goal is that by the end of 2015 -- we’ve got another goal, 2015 -- we want all 50 states to have taken legislative or executive action to help our troops get the credentials they need.  And that means that our troops will be taken care of no matter what state they decide to call home, which is why on the spousal licensing issue it is so important to get the rest of those 13.  We don’t want our men and women -- and their families -- in uniforms and veterans to be limited to where they can live because not all states are onboard.

Now, we know that every state is different and that what works beautifully in one state might not work as easily in another, so we’ve given you all packets like we did a year ago that lay out, step by step, all kinds of options for what each of your states could do on this issue.  And in your packet you’ll also get some tips and also some success stories from states like Oklahoma, Colorado, where Governors Fallin and Hickenlooper have taken important steps to ease the credentialing burden on their veterans in their states.  So we have some wonderful models already out there.  

And I want to emphasize that today will not be the last time that you hear from Jill and me on this issue, because with everything that involves our troops, veterans, and families, we will be working to help support you in whatever way we can along the way.  And we have a couple of folks here today who can help with whatever you need.  We have Todd Veazie, who is here, who’s the new Executive Director for Joining Forces.  Todd is right there.  We have Frank DiGiovanni, who is with the DOD.  Frank, would you stand so that they can see you as well?  

They are here and ready to answer any questions, to provide any follow-up that you may need.  Put them in contact with whoever they should be talking to in your states.  And, more importantly, we’re also going to be talking to your spouses about this, which is really the key -- (laughter) -- because we’re going to make sure they nag you until this happens in your state.  It’s what we’re doing at lunch.

DR. BIDEN:  Yes, that’s right.

MRS. OBAMA:  We also have members of the American Legion here today as well, because they’re behind this effort 100 percent.  And we are so grateful that they’ll be spreading the word about all of this throughout their state and local chapters across the country.  

But in the end, all of you are the ones who can make the biggest difference for our troops on this issue.  So we need you.  We need you to champion these credentialing issues right from the governor’s mansion.  We need you to find allies and supporters in your state legislators.  We need you to galvanize and involve the media in this effort in every way that you can as well.  

Because what we do know is that when you do all that -- what you know as well as Jill and I have seen that people step up.  You see that this is one of those issues, as we talked about at dinner, that everyone can get behind.  That’s the beauty of it.  You’re not going to have to twist many arms to make this happen.  People on both sides of the aisle will start lining up to help on this issue because they know like you and I know that if we do this, we’re not just upholding our values and honoring our troops -- we’ll also be lowering the unemployment rate.  We’ll be improving our health care system.  We’re going to be boosting economic growth in this country through these efforts.

And most importantly, we’re going to be strengthening our country not just for now but for the years ahead.  And in the end, that’s really what Joining Forces is all about.  It’s not just about supporting our heroes while they’re on the battlefield.  It’s about standing with them in these times; standing with them and their families when they come home.  When they come, it’s a forever commitment, because we know that they don’t stop serving this country when their military service ends.  That is the beauty of our servicemembers.  They keep on going.  

We know that they are the next generation of leaders all over the place -- in our businesses, in our hospitals, in our schools.  They are the key resources that will put this country on the track and keep it on the track of greatness.  So we don’t just owe it to them to get issues like this right.  We owe it to our communities and we owe it to our country.  That’s how we will continue to grow our economy, lift up our families, and create even greater opportunities for generations to come.

So today, I want to once again thank you all.  Thank you for everything you do as leaders in your states.  Thank you for the sacrifices that you and your families make to do these jobs.  And thank you for everything that you have done and will continue to do for our men and women in uniform and their families.  And Jill and I look forward to working with you all in the years to come.

So again, thank you.  God bless.  I hope you have a productive day.  And we’ll be following up.  (Laughter.)  Take care.  (Applause.)  


END
11:08 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 05, 2013
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at Wounded Warriors Reception at Winfield House
Hello, everyone! Thank you, Marjorie, for hosting us here today and for your ongoing collaboration as we support our service men and women and their families.
As Second Lady, and as a military mom, I have been honored to spend time with our troops, and our recovering service members—and I am so inspired by the strength and resilience of both British and American military families and veterans.  Major Peter Norton, thank you for your service.
I know a spirit of service is deeply ingrained in all of you … that the warrior mentality doesn’t leave you when you return from war – or when you separate from the military. 
Over the past few days, I have visited with Wounded Warriors and medical staff at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center … and spent the day with soldiers and their families at a US Army base in Germany.
With each visit, I am reminded that our service members and their families have done so much for us … and we can all do something in return.
That spirit is what fuels the Joining Forces initiative the First Lady and I started to support and honor our troops and military families.
And I am very pleased to not only visit with some of the heroes that make the British military so strong, but also all the organizations here that support them.
I know that over the past 10 years, you have all worked so hard to improve the lives of the men and women who have sacrificed so much.  It is your dedication and support that has made all the difference for so many veterans and their families.
You are truly Joining Forces. 
The bonds that British and American troops share are unbreakable. You have served alongside one another every step of the way. Over 250,000 British troops have served alongside Americans in Iraq and Afghanistan. You are brothers and sisters in combat, but also in healing. 
In 2010, a soldier named Brian attended a holiday gathering Joe and I hosted in our home. Brian was newly injured at the time, and he and his young family were adjusting to his new normal – walking on prosthetics … separating from the military … and caring for a newborn while healing from amputations and internal injuries sustained during a blast in Iraq. 
Almost a year later, I was visiting wounded warriors at Walter Reed hospital when I met another young soldier who had just been injured in Afghanistan. 
He told me that he had been struggling to adjust to losing his legs, and to the long healing process ahead of him. 
But he said he was feeling much better because a fellow injured soldier had reached out to him and was mentoring him.  That soldier was Brian. 
Just a year after being injured, Brian was thriving. He gave other wounded warriors confidence that they too would once again be whole. 
I use Brian as an example of that same inner strength we have seen in you as many of you have pursued physical challenges beyond what you ever imagined you could accomplish after your injuries.
Not only do you inspire countless other recovering warriors, you inspire me … my husband Joe … President Barack Obama … First Lady Michelle Obama … and all Americans.
To our heroes and your families, thank you for your sacrifice and service, and to our British partners and friends, thank you for your ongoing commitment to our service men and women. 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 02, 2013
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to the Munich Security Conference. Hotel Bayerischer Hof Munich, Germany
9:22 A.M. (Local) THE VICE PRESIDENT: Well, Wolfgang, let me begin by saying thank you and our expectations are very high as well. (Laughter.) The good news is we’re not going anywhere. The bad news is we’re not going anywhere. (Laughter.) So you have nothing to worry about along those lines. It’s a delight to be back, and it’s a particular delight to be back here starting this morning off observing a tribute to an old friend. One of the great privileges of my career is that I was elected the same year that Sam Nunn was, in 1972, to the United States Senate. And in 1976, one of my -- our closest friends in the Senate arrived. His name was Dick Lugar. I had the privilege of over 30 years chairing or sitting alongside of Dick Lugar on the Foreign Relations Committee. And Sam and Dick and I can say one thing that is rare in politics period, in American politics now: I don’t ever remember there being a harsh word exchanged in over 36 years among any of the three of us. And I always looked to, and still look to, the leadership of Dick and Sam on so many issues. In each of our countries, we’ve had fine men and women who have made significant contributions while they were actively involved in the political process. But many of them, upon leaving that political office they held, recede into private life and their contributions end. I would suggest that Dick Lugar’s* [*sic- Sam Nunn’s] contributions have been as profound from the day he left the United States Senate and public elective office as they have been when he was in public office, and I believe you’ll see the same thing can be said of my very close friend, Sam Nunn* [*sic Dick Lugar]. We, as a country, are lucky to have them both and I would argue everyone assembled in this conference is lucky they are still deeply involved in the security interests of all of us involved. So again, congratulations, Sam. Congratulations. (Applause.) It’s great to be back among friends. When I say among friends, I mean not only the distinguished guests that are from around the world who have joined us in this conference. I also mean to be back here in Germany, to be back here in Europe. I have traveled over 640,000 miles since I’ve been Vice President, and most of the time the President sends me to places that he doesn’t want to go. (Laughter.) So I’ve spent an awful lot of time with McCain and others in Afghanistan and Iraq, and so it’s nice to be here in Germany. (Laughter.) It’s nice to be invited back. (Applause.) You remain, to state the obvious, America’s oldest and our closest allies. And it’s hard to imagine a single threat or a single opportunity that cannot be addressed more effectively if we do so together. Simply put, President Obama and I continue to believe that, Europe is the cornerstone of our engagement with the rest of the world and is the catalyst for our global cooperation. It’s that basic. Nothing has changed. Where we come from is a place that understands that this European alliance is critical to our interests. When I came to Munich four years ago this week, I focused on the challenges of our time, and how this new administration in our first term of office planned on dealing with those challenges. Those challenges included Iraq and Afghanistan; addressing the failure of Iran to meet the international obligations with regard to its nuclear program; managing the crisis of the global economy, which was in a precarious position at that moment; fighting terrorism; repairing our relationships between the United States and Russia. And today, I’m pleased to report on the undeniable progress that we’ve made together in each of these fields. Four years ago, American foreign policy -- and the majority of the discussions with our friends and partners -- was dominated by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Today, we’re in the process of turning the page on more than a decade of conflict following the September 11, 2001 attack, and we ended the war in Iraq responsibly. And together we’re responsibly drawing down in Afghanistan, and by the end of next year, the transition will be complete. Four years ago, Iran had succeeded in dividing the international community over how to address the illicit and destabilizing nuclear program they had underway. We needed to change that dynamic by giving Iran the opportunity to make clear its intentions to the world. As I told the conference then, and I quote: “We will be willing to talk to Iran and offer a very clear choice: Continue down the course and there will be continued pressure and isolation; abandon the illicit nuclear program and your support for terrorism, there will be meaningful incentives.” We were criticized at the time for suggesting we would engage Iran along those lines. Well, we all know what path Iran has chosen. And so the international community came together, and the United States, the European Union and the United Nations imposed what Iran -- the Iranian leaders are acknowledging to be the most robust sanctions in history. As President Obama has made clear to Iranian leaders, our policy is not containment -- it is not containment. It is to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon. But we’ve also made clear that Iran’s leaders need not sentence their people to economic deprivation and international isolation. There is still time, there is still space for diplomacy, backed by pressure, to succeed. The ball is in the government of Iran’s court, and it’s well past time for Tehran to adopt a serious, good-faith approach to negotiations with the P5-plus-1. Four years ago, the world was mired in the deepest economic downturn since the Great Depression. Today, times remain tough for too many American and European families -- but conditions are improving. The United States is taking difficult but critical steps to put ourselves on a sounder economic footing. And I might add, it’s never been a real good bet to bet against America. We’re going to do just fine in terms of our economic “crisis” and the cliffs that are about to approach. We’re determined to continue in a balanced way to cut our debt in the coming years and have made significant strides towards that goal. Last year, with the help of my colleagues in the United States Congress, we reached a difficult agreement on reducing our spending over the next 10 years by close to $1 trillion. Just the end of this year, we agreed on a very difficult decision about our tax code, raising another $600 billion, making significant compromises. There is more to be done, because it’s essential, both for the wellbeing of our citizens, and also for our nation’s ability to meet what Wolfgang stated at the outset: our strategic obligations to the rest of the world. Because the strength of our economy at home is the most fundamental source of our power and influence in the world. But I must say, the same must and can be said of Europe, whose contributions to global stability and prosperity are critical, yet also depend on the strength of your economy and your economic and financial commitment to security. Believe me when I say that I realize how difficult this is with an economy having slipped back into recession last year and the ever-present temptation to back away from commitments on defense spending. But I also know that maintaining our capabilities is what enables us to advance our common global agenda. That’s just one reason why a strong and capable Europe is profoundly in America’s interest, and I might add, presumptuously, the world’s interest. We have seen positive steps recently to address the eurozone crisis, with the European Central Bank pledging to stand behind countries willing to launch reforms, and with Greece, Ireland, Poland* [*sic-Portugal], Spain and Italy all taking important steps to put their economies on a sounder path. Governments across the eurozone must also remain focused on growth and jobs. These may be fundamentally European problems, requiring European solutions, but their resolution has tremendous impact on the United States of America and on the global economy. Now, just imagine what we can do as we get our respective houses in order. Already, Europe is America’s largest economic partner, and the numbers are staggering: over $600 billion in annual trade that creates and sustains millions of jobs on the continent and at home, and a $5 trillion overall commercial relationship. But the potential is so much greater still. There’s a lot of interest lately in the idea of a comprehensive transatlantic trade and investment agreement. The reason we don’t have one already is not because no one ever thought of it; it’s because there have always been difficult issues, such as regulations and standards, which continue to divide us. The question now is whether the political will exists to resolve those longstanding differences. And if so, we should pursue a transatlantic partnership. And if we go down that road, we should try to do it on one tank of gas and avoid protracted rounds of negotiations. This is within our reach. It would be good for growth, job creation, and be good on both sides of the Atlantic; it would strengthen our global trading system; and it would, importantly, help us strategically as a key element -- add another element of our transatlantic alliance. I believe we can overcome these differences and get this done, because the rewards for success are almost boundless. When I addressed this conference four years ago, many of our nations had been scarred in recent memory by the scourge of international terrorism -- 9/11 in the United States, 7/7 in the U.K., 3/11 in Spain. Core al Qaeda was on the ascendancy. Osama bin Laden was alive and well and plotting against our countries, inspiring followers. Four years ago, I spoke of a shared struggle against a “small number of violent extremists beyond the call of reason” and said “we will and we must defeat them.” Now, as a result of the joint efforts of all of our countries and renewed and relentless focus on counterterrorism, the cooperation of our law enforcement agencies, and President Obama’s unflinching determination to bring Osama bin Laden to justice, those -- we’ve made progress. We’ve dealt that organization, al Qaeda, a crippling blow, made all our homelands more secure. But even as we look as -- took the fight to core Al Qaeda in the FATA, we were cognizant of an evolving threat posed by affiliates like AQAP in Yemen, al-Shabaab in Somalia, AQI in Iraq and Syria and AQIM in North Africa. Most of these groups do not pose the same threat, with the same capacity, to our homelands as core al Qaeda once did. And in some cases they are merely amalgams of disparate groups adopting a name. But increasingly they are targeting Western interests overseas. That’s why we have been just as relentless in taking them on. Today, across North Africa and in parts of the Middle East, extremists are seeking to exploit the following: increasingly porous borders; a broad swath of ungoverned territory; readily available weapons; new governments that lack the capacity and sometimes the will to contend with extremism; a swelling generation of disaffected young people whose futures are stifled by stagnant economies. This is not a call to spend tens of billions of dollars and deploy thousands and tens of thousands of boots on the ground, as once occurred. It requires a more integrated strategy, a more coordinated strategy. And the threat that spreads across many nations and millions of square miles cannot and will not be eliminated overnight, and we all know that. But meeting these challenges is going to require us to continue to work together, including through the United Nations, NATO, the G8 and other key international institutions. And it will take a comprehensive approach -- employing the full range of the tools at our disposal -- including our militaries. That’s why the United States applauds and stands with France and other partners in Mali, and why we are providing intelligence support, transportation for the French and African troops and refueling capability for French aircraft. The fight against AQIM may be far from America’s borders, but it is fundamentally in America’s interest. And finally, four years ago at this conference, we proposed the United States and Russia, Mr. Ambassador, press the “reset button,” a phrase that became more used than I had intended when I used the phrase. But the whole idea was to pursue a common agenda around common interests. I would think -- I think Foreign Minister Lavrov would agree that important steps -- that important step enabled us to do some good things: to negotiate, ratify and implement the New START Treaty; to activate unprecedented sanctions on Iran; and unity on North Korea; to build the northern distribution network that supplies the United States and ISAF forces in Afghanistan; to expand economic and trade relationships -- including both Russian accession to the WTO and extension of the permanent normal trade relations to Russia; to negotiate a civilian nuclear cooperation agreement; to build a bilateral presidential commission that networks Russian and American officials and publics on the broadest cooperative agenda the United States and Russia have ever tried to share. But I also made clear four years ago, we are not naïve -- neither Russia or the United States. I said we would not agree with Russia on everything. For example, the United States will not recognize Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states. We will not recognize any nation having a sphere of influence. It will remain America’s view that sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances. All that remains the U.S. position; it will not change. But in the meantime, other clear differences have emerged as well. It’s no secret that we have serious differences on issues like Syria, missile defense, NATO enlargement, democracy, human rights. These differences are real. But we continue to see opportunities for the United States and Russia to partner in ways that advance our mutual security interest and the interest of the international community -- whether by safeguarding and reducing nuclear arsenals, boosting our trade and investment to help each other unlock the enormous innovative potential of our societies, working collaboratively to advance freedom of navigation in the Arctic while preserving access to natural resources. New challenges -- there are new challenges in the years to come. Over the next four years and beyond, Europe and the United States will turn our attention to a new set of challenges no less daunting than the ones that came when I addressed this conference four years ago. But I would also -- I argue no less soluble than those challenges we faced four years ago. President Obama will say more about this agenda next week in his State of the Union address, and I’ve learned as Vice President it’s not a good thing to steal the President’s thunder, John. (Laughter.) I’ve learned that. I’ve gotten better after four years of this. But it will reflect our shared interests in the following areas: advancing a comprehensive nuclear agenda to strengthen the nonproliferation regime, reduce global stockpiles and secure nuclear materials -- and I am looking forward -- Sam told me of the initiative that he and his colleagues are thinking about, and we’re anxious to hear it -- getting -- combating climate change, moving it up on the agenda; enhancing our development initiatives to promote global health and food security and end extreme poverty in the near future; strengthening our alliances, which are essentially -- essential to our ability to meet our challenges in the 21st century; continuing to take down barriers to trade including with Europe to spur growth on both sides of the Atlantic; maintaining our commitment to the elusive but essential goal of Middle East Peace; and strengthening the -- engaging the democracies in Southeast Asia, Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa and across the Middle East. And this afternoon, I’ll be meeting here in Munich with the leaders of the Syrian Opposition Coalition, as many of you have already done. President Obama and I and nearly all of our partners and allies are convinced that President Assad, a tyrant, hell-bent on clinging to power, is no longer fit to lead the Syrian people and he must go. We can all agree -- but we can all agree not on how or what we do -- we can all agree on the increasingly desperate plight of the Syrian people and the responsibility of the international community to address that plight. Just this week the international community came together to raise -- to pledge $1.5 billion in pledges for humanitarian support for the Syrian people and refugees fleeing the violence. As part of that effort, President Obama announced that we would be contributing $155 million, bringing the total of humanitarian aid for Syria to $365 million -- the largest contribution of any nation’s humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. We also provided more than $50 million in non-lethal assistance to the Syrian opposition and are working, alongside our partners to help them become more inclusive and cohesive. As President Obama said last week, we’re under no illusions. The days ahead will continue to be very difficult. But the opposition continues to grow stronger. And as the Syrian people have their chance to forge their own future, they will continue to find a partner in the United States of America. Europe remains I might add -– Europe remains essential to that entire effort. As I said at the outset, Europe is the cornerstone of our engagement with the world, and Europe is the catalyst -- our catalyst for global cooperation. And as I hope we’ll all agree, although our mutual agenda has shifted over the past four years, one important thing remains unchanged: We need to work together; we need to stick together. We need you as much as you need us. Neither the United States nor any other country can alone address the challenges we face. We know that. Europe remains America’s indispensable partner of first resort. And, if you forgive some presumptuousness, I believe we remain your indispensable partner. I stand before you as a proud Atlanticist for my entire career and a firm believer in the transatlantic ties that have never been deeper, in my view, broader or more important at any time since I was elected as a kid in 1972. Time and again, when it comes to a search for partners in this extremely complex world, Europe and America still look to each other before they look anywhere else. Our soldiers, diplomats, security personnel, and citizens continue to stand shoulder-to-shoulder. In Afghanistan, America looks to Europe, which provides about 30,000 troops and trainers and has spent almost $15 billion. Our collaboration on missile defense is protecting both of our populations -– and our agreements with Romania, Spain and Turkey provide tangible proof of that cooperation. Our intensified counterterrorism cooperation has helped keep 800 million citizens safer than they had been in the recent past. In Libya, NATO acted quickly, effectively and decisively. And now we are working together to support Libya in building effective institutions of governance that have never existed before. European partnership remains an indispensable force in advancing democracy and universal rights. We’ve joined forces in response to the unprecedented promise and unresolved turmoil of the Arab Spring. From Tunis to Tripoli, Cairo to Sana’a, our collaboration could not be closer. And it’s going to be required to continue. We also know there is unfinished business in our common project of a Europe whole and free. Georgia and the states of the Balkans have unfulfilled aspirations for Euro-Atlantic integration. The pace of these integration efforts will be determined by the aspirants themselves. But we too share a responsibility for helping them achieve their rightful place in Europe and the Transatlantic Alliance. The broader focus also needs to be kept in mind. But folks, our interests well go -- go well beyond the territory of our nations. In a changing world, what’s unique about our collaboration with Europe is that the issues we address truly span the globe. That’s all the more essential in a changing world, where emerging powers and far-flung events can have profound impact in each of our countries. It’s a simple fact that nations like Brazil, India, China, South Africa, Indonesia will continue play an ever greater role in the global security and economic affairs of the world. And it’s in all of our interests that they emerge as responsible, fully integrated actors on the world stage. That’s why America’s engagement with these countries -— and particularly in Asia -— plays an increasingly prominent role in our conduct of our foreign affairs. This engagement does not come at Europe’s expense. Many of you I know talk to us, talk to me about are we taking our focus off of Europe as we’ve reasserted that we are a Pacific power -- and we are a Pacific power. It’s quite the opposite. It is profoundly in Europe’s interest for America to engage more broadly with the world, and we should be doing it more fully together. In the economic realm, European customers and companies gain from the United States advocating on behalf of greater market access or fairer rules of the road in international trade. Europe also gains from peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region, and the United States -– along with our allies in the region –- have helped guarantee that. At the request of President Obama and Chinese President Hu two years ago, we were asked -- they asked us both -- both President Xi -- Vice President Xi and I to spend some more time together. We traveled to each other’s countries, spent literally scores of hours together, spent 10 days together in each of our countries -- five and five. And I believe that --President Obama and I believe that this -- establishing personal relationships with an emerging Chinese leadership -- is critically important not only to the United States, but that we know and they know where we stand. We fully understand one another. I say to my colleagues in the House and the Senate, Tip O’Neill used to say, all politics is local. I believe all politics, particularly international politics, is personal. I think personal relationships matter. So when I visited China I made it absolutely clear that the United States does not view China with hostile intent and that we can cooperate and compete simultaneously. I’ve said many times, the rise of a peaceful and responsible China that contributes to global security and prosperity is in the interests of all nations. And we all have a role to play in encouraging Beijing to define its interests more in terms of common global concerns than merely introspective concerns. The United States is a Pacific power. And the world’s greatest military alliance helps make us an Atlantic power as well. As our new defense strategy makes clear, we will remain both a Pacific power and an Atlantic power. And I would respectfully suggest it’s very much in Europe’s interest that we do so. The bottom line is that the USA, Europe -- we all have an important and specific interest in an Asia-Pacific region that is peaceful and growing –- as do our Russian friends and our Japanese friends. So we ought to intensify our cooperation in advance of those interests, moving forward together. I have to discuss today just -- I’ve discussed today just some of the challenges that we face over the next four years and many more years to come. There are many more that I could name and inevitably others on the horizon that only will emerge in time. In a complex world, there is a comfort in knowing that we can face them together though because we’ve done it in the past. Together we can again provide the doubters -- prove the doubters wrong who never tire of tedious question that from my first -- as a young senator, chairman of the European Affairs Subcommittee of Foreign Relations Committee, attended my first meeting on NATO in 1976 and the question was: Whither NATO? I have never attended a conference where that wasn’t a subset of the conference: Whither NATO? Are we going to make it? Are we going to stick together? Ladies and gentlemen, we should scoff at the notion that we cannot make it together. We have to. America, North America and Europe have to meet these security challenges of the modern world together. And we will continue to do so. So I thank you very much for inviting me back to Munich, and to begin by laying out some of the plans of our administration over the next four years. It’s an honor to be with you today, and I look forward to having some private meetings with a number of you and say to my Senate and House friends, if you’re willing, I’d like to buy you lunch or something before you’re out of here, okay? (Laughter.) All right, thank you all so very much for allowing me to be here today, and I appreciate all you’ve done. (Applause.) AMBASSADOR ISCHINGER: Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Vice President. Thank you so much. We have time for just one or two questions. The Vice President was kind enough to accept to take a few questions. I have a whole bunch of questions here. I’m sure that Sergei Lavrov will want to comment on the U.S.-Russian relationship, so the two questions I thought I should choose from this stack -- one is on Iran and one is on China. I’ll start with the question on Iran: Many argue that the time for direct U.S.-Iranian negotiations has come. When is that going to happen, and if not, why not? THE VICE PRESIDENT: When the Iranian leadership, Supreme Leader, is serious. We have made it clear at the outset that we would not -- we would be prepared to meet bilaterally with the Iranian leadership. We would not make it a secret that we were doing that. We would let our partners know if that occasion presented itself. That offer stands, but it must be real and tangible, and there has to be an agenda that they’re prepared to speak to. We are not just prepared to do it for the exercise. AMBASSADOR ISCHINGER: The other question is about -- and you talked about that, the relationship with China, the so-called pivot or the rebalancing. I read the question: How concerned are you, Mr. Vice President, about the conflicts brewing in the Pacific? If Henry Kissinger is right, U.S.-China relations are the single most important bilateral relationship, he said. What are your plans, what are the administration’s plans to make sure that this will develop into a constructive partnership and not into a kind of new Cold War confrontation? THE VICE PRESIDENT: I am confident that it’s in the interests of China and the emerging Chinese leadership that it not result in conflict. The last thing that they need at this moment -- and they’re dealing with the incredible potential and incredibly complex problems relative to their economy, their growth and their national needs -- is to engage in anything remotely approaching military competition with the United States. I do not believe that is their intention. It clearly is not our intention. We work and coordinate with our Russian friends and our Japanese friends as well. The bottom line here is that we believe the most important thing to assure that this not occur is to have a frank -- and I mean frank, straightforward, private dialogue with the emerging leadership in China, letting them know what our interests are, letting them know what we believe our role is, and let them make judgments about whether or not that in any way conflicts with their growth patterns or their -- what they believe ability to maintain their own national security interest. The only thing, as I said in one of my -- as I said, we spent 10 days together, my colleague, the ascendant President, still Vice President of China, President Xi. And we both acknowledged that the most dangerous thing is, at this juncture and the next several years of our relationship, is a misunderstanding. The only conflict worse than one that is intended, as my father would say, was one that’s unintended. And so it’s very important we speak frankly about -- for example, I referred to the China Sea. I pointed out it’s not China’s sea; it’s international waters. They have great interests and they have as much interest as anyone else does. It’s a matter of laying out clearly what the parameters of the relationship are and those of the neighbors. And I am convinced that it is -- if we do our job correctly and we, in fact, interface directly with the leadership, that there will be intense competition, there will be occasional misunderstandings, but there will not be -- my children -- my son, who is with me today, a 40-year-old man, will not, when he is my age, be looking at China as a sworn enemy. I do not believe that’s in the cards. I believe there is healthy competition from a growing, emerging China, which I would argue is in the interest of all of us. I’ll conclude by saying I went so far as to say, and I believe it was acknowledged, that one of the reasons China has been able to have this period of sort of sustained growth and stability is because of a U.S. presence in the Pacific, not in spite of. And so I believe we can, with a lot of hard work and direct dialogue, avoid confrontation and manage what will be an intense competition, particularly in the economic field. But then again, I am an American; I look forward to competition. Thank you. (Applause.) END 9:57 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 January 20, 2013
Remarks by the President, the Vice President, the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Inaugural Reception
The Building Museum
Washington, D.C.
8:48 P.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Good evening, everyone.  Thank you so much for joining us tonight.  But more than that, thank you for the kindness, friendship and support that you’ve shown us since we’ve begun this long journey together.  We wouldn’t be here without your help, and that means so much to me and Joe.
Joe and I are thrilled, and I know you feel the same way, to have Barack Obama as our President for another four years -- (applause) -- and Michelle as First Lady.  (Applause.)  And I may be a little biased, but I couldn’t think of a better man than my husband to help our President lead our country for the next four years.  (Applause.)  As long as he has the privilege of serving this nation, I know that Joe will keep fighting for American people every day. 
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming my husband, our Vice President, Joe Biden.  (Applause.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  I’m going to move this away, baby. 
Hello, I'm Jill Biden’s husband, and I’m delighted to be with you all here.  (Laughter.)  Let me begin with the simplest of statements:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, thank you, thank you.  You’re the only reason that we are here.  Thank you for your support.  Thank you for being here.  And most of all, thank you for believing in us. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I’ve been honored to serve as Vice President.  But I’ve been especially honored to serve as Barack Obama’s Vice President.  (Applause.)  This man has already done an absolutely remarkable job:  Historic health care reform, two Supreme Court appointees -- Justice Sonya Sotomayor and Elaine Kagan -- ending the war in Iraq and about to end the war in Afghanistan -- (applause) -- and stating forthrightly his support for marriage equality.  (Applause.)  And I want you to know something else about this guy Barack Obama -- he’s just getting started.  He’s just getting started.  (Applause.)
In the weeks and months ahead, we’re going to reduce gun violence here in America.  (Applause.)  We’re going to pass comprehensive immigration reform.  (Applause.)  And we’re going to put this nation’s economy on a sustainable path to the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, it’s my great honor to introduce you to a magnificent, a truly magnificent First Lady Michelle Obama, and the guy she hangs out with -- my friend, President Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
 Hey.  (Laughter and applause.)  I thought you weren’t coming out.  (Laughter.)  I thought you weren’t coming.  (Laughter.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Hi, everybody.  (Applause.)  Excuse our tardiness.  But you know what, when Stevie Wonder has a few words to say to you -- (laughter) -- you don’t rush Stevie Wonder.  (Laughter.)  So pardon our delay, but thank you.  Thanks so much, Jill.  Thank you for that kind introduction.  But more importantly, thank you for your leadership and service.  (Applause.)
I love Joe Biden.  (Applause.)  I love Jill a little bit more.  (Laughter.)  But I want to thank you both for making this journey so much more fun.  Our families have bonded and this has just been a phenomenal four years.  And I’m ready to do four more with both of you.  (Applause.)
THE PRESIDENT:  Four more.
MRS. OBAMA:  Four more.
And most of all, I want to thank all of you here tonight for everything -- everything -- that you’ve done to bring this   to life.  This weekend has been such a wonderful celebration for our people and for the future.  And we know that none of it could have happened without all of you.  And that’s why it was so important for all of us to be here and to spend some time with you.
 
So this weekend, as we look ahead to the next four years, we should absolutely take some time to truly enjoy this next few days.  I mean, the last one was kind of fast.  (Laughter.)  So we’ve all agreed that we’re going to take some time to just breathe in and enjoy it.
But let's also remember that this   is about more than all of the events that we will all enjoy this weekend.  It's about more than swearing in a President.  It's about more than we accomplish together over the next four years.  It's also about the opportunities we have to make a real difference in people's lives.  (Applause.)  I mean, the truth is it's about our opportunity to continue to lift up our families, to help more of our children achieve their dreams, and to put our country on a solid foundation not just for these next few years, but for generations to come.
So tonight, let us re-dedicate ourselves to that work.  Let us keep building on the progress that we've made.  And let's keep working and fighting and pushing forward --
THE PRESIDENT:  Forward.
MRS. OBAMA:  Forward. (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Forward.
MRS. OBAMA:  -- forward to make the real changes that's happened. 
And that's what this man, my husband, has been doing for these last four years.  (Applause.)  And let me tell you, it has just been a true thrill to watch this handsome, charming -- (laughter) -- individual grow into the man and the President that he is.  We have seen him every single day -- his integrity, his character, his sense of humor -- (laughter) -- his compassion, his courage.  And no matter what the obstacles, we have seen him be so steady facing the challenges that lie ahead and, as always, held true to one unwavering belief -- and that is that we love this country, and we can all work together to change it. 
So, ladies and gentlemen, it is my distinct honor and pleasure to welcome the love of my life and our President for the next four years, Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
THE PRESIDENT:  Good evening.  Now, first of all, I love Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  And to address the most significant event of this weekend, I love her bangs.  (Laughter and applause.)  She looks good.  She always looks good.
You know, as President, you make a lot of important decisions.  Probably the most important decision is who is going to be your partner during the course of your presidency.  And there have been some decisions I got right, some maybe folks might question.  But one decision I know was absolutely correct, absolutely spot on, was my choice of Vice President.  I could not have a better partner than Joe Biden.  And Joe Biden couldn’t have a better partner than Dr. Jill Biden.  (Applause.)  We love these folks.  Give them a round of applause.  (Applause.) 
Now, some of you may have heard the story of Andrew Jackson's inaugural reception.  Party-goers got so rowdy they broke several thousands of dollars' worth of White House china.  (Laughter.)  So my first big thank-you tonight is to the National Building Museum for hosting us here.  (Laughter.) 
I also want to thank The Source for their outstanding entertainment, the U.S. Navy Sea Chanters -- (applause) -- and a guy who has been known to make pretty good music, Mr. Stevie Wonder.  (Applause.) 
I'm delivering another speech tomorrow so tonight I'm going to be pretty brief, because there are a limited amount of good lines and you don’t want to use them all up tonight.  (Laughter.) My main purpose tonight is just to say thank you. 
As I look out on the room, we've got people from every walk of life, every corner and nook and cranny of this country, every state, every city, every suburb -- people who have invested so much heart, soul, time, money, energy.  One of the things that made this campaign unique was the degree of investment and ownership people had in this common project of ours, because you understood this was not just about a candidate; it was not just about Joe Biden or Barack Obama.  This was about us, who we are as a nation, what values we cherish, how hard we're willing to fight to make sure that those values live not just for today but for future generations.
All of you here understood and were committed to the basic notion that when we put our shoulders to the wheel of history, it moves.  (Applause.)  It moves.  It moves forward.  And that’s part of what we celebrate when we come together for  .
Yesterday, Americans in all 50 states took part in a National Day of Service.  Tomorrow, hundreds of thousands will join us in the National Mall.  And what the   reminds us of is the role we have as fellow citizens in promoting a common good even as we carry out our individual responsibilities -- the sense that there's something larger than ourselves that gives shape and meaning to our lives. 
The theme of this year's   is “Our people and our future.”  And throughout my career, what’s always given me energy and inspiration and hope, what’s allowed me to stand up when I’ve been knocked down, are folks like you -- the decency, the goodness, the resilience, the neighborliness, the patriotism, the sense of duty, the sense of responsibility of the American people.  You have inspired me throughout. 
And so whenever I think about the challenges that Joe and I and Jill and Michelle face, we know that we stand amongst friends and colleagues and fellow citizens, and that the work is not just ours, that we are working together. 
So I just want to say thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  And I want all of you to know that even as we celebrate over the next couple of days -- and feel free to stay up as late as you want.  Tomorrow is not a school night.  Make sure to bundle up -- although it won’t be as cold as it was four years ago.  (Laughter.)  Make sure you know that what we’re celebrating is not the election or swearing-in of a President;  What we’re doing is celebrating each other, and celebrating this incredible nation that we call home.  (Applause.) 
And after we celebrate, let’s make sure to work as hard as we can to pass on an America that is worthy not only of our past but also of our future.  (Applause.) 
God bless you guys.  I love you.  We’ll see you tomorrow.  (Applause.)
END
9:02 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 January 19, 2013
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at the Kids Inaugural Concert
7:45 P.M. EST
DR. BIDEN: Hello, everyone! (Applause.) Thank you for that wonderful introduction, Jaelen. I’m so proud of Jaelen, and I know you brought some other kids from Lee Hall Elementary. It’s so good to see all of you. (Applause.) Oh, they’re over there. And I want to thank your mom and your whole family for their service to our country.
J.R. Martinez, it is always wonderful to see you. Thank you for your service and all that you continue to do for our military families. The First Lady and I are so excited to be here with all these military kids.
I want to give a special welcome to some very brave kids from the Delaware Army National Guard 153rd Military Police Company. (Applause.) Just a few weeks ago, I was with them when their moms or dads were deployed to Afghanistan. I want you all to know that we are so proud of you and we will be here for you while your moms and dads are away.
The First Lady and I knew from the start that we wanted to celebrate the strength and service of our military families. That’s why we started Joining Forces -- our effort to encourage all Americans to find ways to honor and support our troops, veterans and military families. Joining Forces is especially important to me because I know something about being a military mom. Our son Beau is a major in the Delaware Army National Guard, and he was deployed to Iraq for a year. Beau has two children, Natalie and Hunter, so I know -- (applause) -- thank you -- so I know firsthand just how important it is for a child to have everyone’s support -- their friends, their teachers, and their entire community -- when mom or dad is away.
So we want tonight to be one special way that our country shows all of you just how much we appreciate everything you’re doing for our country. And we are so excited to be here with you tonight, here with everyone.
Now I would like to introduce someone else who is so proud of you and excited to be here. She’s been working so hard for military families. Please welcome my great friend and partner, First Lady Michelle Obama. (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA: Wow. Thank you so much. Thank you, Jill. Big hand to Jill, my partner. (Applause.) How is everybody doing? (Applause.) Are you guys having fun? (Applause.) Are you excited to be here for the  ? (Applause.) Well, we are all excited that you could join us tonight, both here in Washington and from all across the country and around the world by video.
We’ve got kids from Fort Hood that are here. (Applause.) We’ve got folks who have joined us from Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam. They’re in the house. (Applause.) We have folks from Wright-Patterson Air Force Base here. (Applause.) We’ve got folks from Camp Pendleton who are here with us. (Applause.) And we’ve got Coast Guard Air Station Clearwater here as well. (Applause.) Yes!
And for the wonderful kids from Naval Air Station Sigonella who led the Pledge of Allegiance -- (applause) -- yes! -- we have some very special guests that are here as well -- your parents! (Applause.) Those are your parents. So let’s give them a round of applause. We’ve beamed them in. (Applause.) They’re right there. Wave to them. They can see you. (Applause.)
Now,   is a pretty big deal. The President and the Vice President are sworn in. There are all these inaugural balls, everybody dresses up and dances. We had a wonderful day of service today, and hundreds of thousands of people come from all 50 states to join in the celebration. And let me tell you, I love every single minute of it. Every single minute. But I have to tell you that my very favorite part of this entire weekend is being right here with all of you. (Applause.) Absolutely. Because for me, this is what   is all about. It’s about celebrating who we are as Americans and all the things that make this country so great. And when I think about who we are, when I think about what makes America great, I think about all of you --our men and women in uniform, our military spouses, and our amazing military kids.
And that’s why Jill and I wanted to host this event. And we’re not the only ones that wanted to pay tribute to all of you today. You see, when we said we wanted to host a concert to honor our military kids, let me tell you, everyone wanted to be here. Usher wanted to be here. (Applause.) Katy Perry wanted to be here. (Applause.) Nick Cannon, the folks from Glee, and all the other amazing performers -- they wanted to be here, too. (Applause.) And let me tell you, they’re not here for me. They’re not here for Dr. Biden. They are here for all of you. Because they know the kind of sacrifices that you all make every single day.
Let me just share something. Did you know that the -- that a military kid attends an average of six to nine schools by the time he or she graduates from high school? I mean, just think about that. Just imagine how much courage it takes to always be the new kid -- to walk through the doors of a new school every couple of years; to have to make new friends again and again. And did you know that our men and women in uniform often have to be away from their families for months, sometimes years.
Just think about the level of maturity that is required for military kids during those times, just think about that. Think about how they have to step up at home without even being asked -- taking out the trash when dad’s not there; helping brothers and sisters with their homework when mom is away.
Think about how hard it is for military kids to be apart from the people they love most, how they miss their moms and dads every day and would do anything to have them back home. And that’s just a glimpse of what it means to be a military kid. It means always thinking about things that are so much bigger than yourself. It means growing up just a little faster and working just a little harder than other kids. And it means doing the greatest thing you can ever do with your life at such a young age, and that is to serve our country.
So to America’s military kids, let me tell you, make no mistake about it, you all are an important part of the greatest military on Earth. (Applause.) By supporting your families, you all are helping to protect this country and keep every single one of us safe. You’re doing that. And Dr. Biden and I are so incredibly proud of you all. Every day, we’re proud of you. Let me tell you, our husbands are proud -- the Vice President, the President -- they are proud of you.
And in the coming years, as these wars draw to an end and we draw down our troops, I want you all to know --(applause) -- absolutely -- but here’s the thing: I want you to know, you and your families to know that we will not be drawing down our work to support you. We will be doing just the opposite, because the fact is that today we have a greater obligation to serve you than ever before. And we will do everything in our power, everything to meet that obligation to make sure that our military families get the benefits they’ve earned and the support and recognition you all deserve.
So in the coming months and years through Joining Forces, Dr. Biden and I, we will keep calling on Americans to translate the love and pride that we all feel into action that makes a real difference for you and your families. Every single one of us has a role to play here. And I encourage everyone watching tonight to go to JoiningForces.gov and find out how you can give back to our military families. Because we cannot rest, no, we cannot be satisfied until we are serving all of you as well as you’ve served this country. You all deserve nothing less.
And with that, there is someone else here tonight who would like to show her appreciation for you all. She is our final performer for this evening. Should we bring her out? Are you ready? (Applause.) Are you really ready? (Applause.) All right, then. It is now my pleasure to introduce the fabulous Katy Perry!
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 06, 2012
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at the Democratic National Convention
Charlotte Convention Center
Charlotte, North Carolina
9:15 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  What a night!  What a crowd!  (Applause.)  
Thank you, Angie.  I’m so proud of you and how far you’ve come.
I’m so proud to stand before you tonight not only as the wife of our Vice President, but as a full-time teacher and a military mom.  (Applause.)  I’m here for our son, Beau, and for all of our troops, veterans and military families.  (Applause.)
Four years ago, Beau stood on this stage to introduce his father, and soon afterward, he deployed to Iraq for a year with the Delaware Army National Guard.  (Applause.)  Tonight, thanks to the leadership of President Obama and my husband, Joe, the war in Iraq is over.  (Applause.) 
I’m also here tonight for my students -- students like Angie who work so hard to create a better life for themselves and their families.  I’ve been a teacher for more than 30 years, and to this day, I continue to teach full-time at a community college in Northern Virginia.  (Applause.)    
Not long after Joe was elected Vice President, people started questioning whether I could keep teaching.  Not Joe.  He was there, standing by my side, saying, "Of course you should. It’s who you are, Jill."  For me, being a teacher isn’t just what I do -- it’s who I am.  (Applause.)  These issues are personal to me.  And for the more than 37 years that I’ve known Joe, I’ve seen firsthand just how personal they are to him, too.
Joe often tells people that I didn’t agree to marry him until the fifth time he asked me.  (Laughter.)  The truth is that I loved him from the start.  I saw in him then the same character that I see in him today.  I’ve seen Joe’s character in his optimism.  For families who have lost a loved one, kids struggling to find their way, workers out of a job, Joe always works to give people a sense of hope.  (Applause.)   
I’ve also seen Joe’s character in his determination.  Two decades ago, when Joe started working on the Violence Against Women Act -- (applause) -- domestic violence was often treated as a private family matter rather than the crime it is.  But Joe knew that he had to bring this issue out into the open.  And in the years since that bill has passed, I’ve had women tell me that their sisters or their friends wouldn’t be alive today if it weren’t for Joe.  (Applause.)  
Finally, I’ve seen Joe’s character in his heart.  When I first met him, Joe had already seen just how fragile life could be.  When he was 29 years old, Joe lost his first wife and baby daughter in a tragic car accident while they were out getting their Christmas tree, and their boys were critically injured.
Joe’s life was shattered.  But through his strong Catholic faith and his fierce love for our boys, Joe found the strength to get back up.
That’s Joe -- (applause) -- that optimism, that determination, that big, strong heart that drives him forward every day.  It’s what he learned as a young boy growing up with two hardworking parents in Scranton, Pennsylvania.  (Applause.)  It’s what makes him such a loving and supportive father of our three children -- Beau, Hunter, and Ashley.  And it’s what drives him today as he and President Obama fight to strengthen the middle class they grew up in.
For as long as I’ve known him, Joe has never given up, never failed to see the possibilities, and never had any doubt about who he’s fighting for.  And as long as he has the privilege of serving this nation, I know, from the bottom of my heart, that he will continue to fight for you every day.
Thank you.  God bless our troops, and God bless our military families.  Thank you.  (Applause.) 
END                         
9:21 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 September 06, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden to the Women's Caucus at the Democratic National Convention
Charlotte Convention Center
Charlotte, North Carolina
11:37 A.M. EDT
 
MRS. BIDEN: Thank you, Mame, for that introduction and for your leadership of the Women’s Caucus. It’s so exciting to be here. (Applause.) I know you are hearing speeches all week, so I’m going to be brief. Mostly I want to thank you -- I want you all to know how much we appreciate everything that you are doing for this campaign all across the country.
 
And as you know, there’s so much at stake in this election. I don’t know about you, but over these last few weeks and months, it’s become more and more clear that we can’t go back and fight the same battles we’ve fought. (Applause.)
 
We’ve been fighting them for years, and even decades, and believe me, I’m old enough that I know those fights in the '60s. From the choices we’ve made about health care to the pay we earn at the workplace, the choice women face in this election couldn’t be clearer. One thing we know for sure is that our President and our Vice President have our backs. (Applause.) And we’ve got to make sure that the other women in our lives know just how important it is that we’ve got Joe and Barack’s backs as well. (Applause.)
 
So I want to ask you to do your part to move this country forward. We simply can’t leave all the passion and enthusiasm right here in Charlotte, North Carolina. We’ve got to get out and work all across this country.
 
That’s something that Michelle is going to talk to you about in a few minutes. She's someone who has been a wonderful supporter and partner to me over the past four years. She has been an incredible, inspiring example for all of us, but more than ever, I’m just proud to call her my friend. (Applause.)
 
So please join me in welcoming our First Lady, Michelle Obama. (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA: Oh, yes! (Applause.) All right. This is good stuff. Okay, everybody, rest yourselves -- (laughter) -- because I’m going to ask you to do some work. So I want you to be sitting -- (laughter) -- when I give you that charge.
 
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We love you, Michelle!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Love you guys. Love you so much. (Applause.)
 
And let me just say, to say that I am thrilled to be here is an understatement. For me and Jill, you all fire us up. you get us focused on what we need to do. So thank you all so much.
 
And I want to thank Jill, because there is nothing “second” about this lady. (Laughter and applause.) I am always amazed. First of all, she always looks good. She looks like this in the morning, she looks like this when we’re doing service, when she’s playing with that big, huge dog they have. (Laughter.) He’s like a wolf. (Laughter.) But he’s very sweet.
 
So she is beautiful, she is incredibly kind, and the fact that she has been able to manage this role as being the wife of the Vice President -- and she is a full-time teacher -- is just a testament to her. (Applause.) And she has got the best kids and grandkids you’d ever want to meet. So she is still mom-in-chief as well. So let’s give a hand to my partner and friend, Jill Biden. (Applause.)
 
And again, I want to thank Mame for her leadership, for that wonderful, kind, generous introduction. Mame, you’re doing an outstanding job. Thank you so much. (Applause.)
 
And I know that we have a lot of elected officials and members of the administration here today. I see all of my good women out there. Thank you, guys, for being here. Thank you for working so hard and fighting the good fight every single day. Thank you, guys. (Applause.)
 
Now, I don’t know about all of you, but I think we have had a pretty amazing week here in Charlotte. (Applause.) And from the energy and enthusiasm that we’re seeing, again, not just in the caucuses, but on the streets and just in -- it’s just palpable. It is so clear that folks are fired up. That’s for sure.
 
And I think President Clinton did a phenomenal job last night, didn’t he? (Applause.) I think that he and the other speakers once again reminded us of the values and vision that we all share. That’s all we’ve been talking about, right? The values we’re talking about are ones that we all hold dear. Hard work should be rewarded -- that’s how we were raised, that everyone in this country has something special and valuable to contribute, and that we should all have a fair chance to succeed if we’re willing to put that work in -- which we are.
 
And today, I want to thank all of you -- all of you and so many more. There are women all over this country who are doing that work, playing that critical role in making that vision a reality. Because we have to work for that vision, women. It just doesn’t happen. And I want to thank you for everything that you’ve been doing every day to lift up our communities and to move this country forward -- and make sure that all of our children have opportunities worthy of their promise, right?
 
And whether it’s investing in our schools, whether it’s signing the Lilly Ledbetter Act to help women get equal pay for equal work -- (applause) -- whether it’s passing health reform so that all of our families can get the care they deserve, my husband and his partner, Joe Biden, have had our backs as women every single day. Every single day. (Applause.)
 
And I know that my husband has fought these battles not just as President -- I said this in my speech -- he’s fought them as a son, as a grandson, as a husband, and as the father of our two amazing daughters. (Applause.) So Barack understands the challenges women face. I think that’s been made abundantly clear.
 
And we know that he will keep fighting every single day to ensure that all of our daughters have no limits to their dreams. That’s over. (Applause.) That there are no second-class citizens in our workplace -- that’s got to be over. That we as women can make our own decisions about our bodies and about our health care -- that is over. (Applause.)
 
And that’s why I know all of   today -- because you know that all of that and so much more, it’s on the line. It’s all at stake this November. All those gains, all that struggle can be gone.
 
And I know that you’re here because you believe, like I believe, that my husband has been an extraordinary President. (Applause.) And he has what it takes -- he’s got the vision, he’s got the character, the wisdom, the judgment, the courage, the experience to keep moving this country forward for four more years.
 
AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Four more years. But one thing I’ve been reminding people -- just after the speeches and all of the excitement, that we can’t forget that this election is about even more than the issues that are at stake right now. And it’s about even more than the candidates that are on the ballot this year. This election more than any other in history is about how we want our democracy to function for decades to come.
 
Listen, it’s about the lessons we want our kids and grandkids to learn as they watch these campaigns and they look on election night and see those results. And we need to step back and ask ourselves, here in America, do we want to give just a few individuals a far bigger say in our democracy than anybody else?
 
AUDIENCE: No!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Do we want our elections to be all about who buys the most ads on TV?
 
AUDIENCE: No!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Do we want our kids and grandkids to walk away from this election feeling like ordinary folks and their voices can no longer be heard?
 
AUDIENCE: No!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Or are we going to show our next generation that here in America we all have an equal voice in the voting booth --(applause) -- and we all have a say in our country’s future -- no matter how much we make, or what we look like, or who we love, that we’re all equal when it comes to our democracy? (Applause.) Are we going to show them that a bottom-up, grassroots movement of people who love this country can still come together to move it forward? What are going to do? What do we want to teach our kids? (Applause.)
 
And make no mistake about it -- see, this is where you all come in, because with everything you do -- every call you make, every door you knock on, with every voter that you register, you all are providing the answers to those questions. Understand that. You all are making a powerful statement about how we want our democracy to work.
 
And by taking part in the democratic process that for more than 200 [sic] centuries has made America the greatest country on Earth. You all are helping to preserve that legacy for the next generations that take this stuff over.
 
So we don’t have a minute to waste. That is the call to action. We don't have a minute to waste. We all need to work like we’ve never worked before. We need to do every single thing that we can. We need every single one of you out there every day between now and November 6th. You get me?
 
AUDIENCE: Yes!
 
MRS. OBAMA: That means when you get up from those chairs and you walk out that room, the work begins. It continues for so many us. but for some of us, it will begin. And what you need to know is that we have a first-rate campaign -- we really do -- with offices all across this country. (Applause.) We have countless people who are volunteering, giving their time and their energy, taking time out of their busy lives.
 
We have many, many ways to volunteer and get involved. So if you aren't already involved in this campaign in a real, passionate way, start by going to barackobama.com. (Applause.) Just go there -- today. You can sign up. You can find out how to help. If you don't live in a battleground state, get to one. (Applause.) We all live near a battleground state if we don't live in one. Look around. This election is going to be won in those battleground states. If you can afford it, write a check. And if you haven’t maxed out, max out. (Laughter and applause.) Now is the time. (Laughter.)
 
But more importantly than any of that, make sure that every single person that you know -- I mean, everybody that you know, everybody within the length of your influence, the touch of your hand, the sound of your voice -- your friends, your neighbors, that nephew you haven’t seen in a while, that college roommate you haven’t spoken to in decades -- now is the time. Pick up the phone. Call them. Make sure every single one of them gets to the polls and casts their votes on November 7th [6th.] (Applause.) That's what we need you to do.
 
Because here is your power -- understand your power. And these numbers really amaze me. Barack has said that this election is going to be even closer than the last one -- because all elections in this country are close. Let's just not forget that. They're always close. But like the others, this one could come down to those last few thousand votes in a single battleground state.
 
So let's put this in perspective. Let's think back to 2008 -- wonderful victory, right? (Applause.) Back then, we won Florida by about 236,000 votes. And while that might sound like a lot, understand that that is just 36 votes per precinct in that state -- 36 people in a precinct. That's how these numbers shake out.
 
And if you think that's close, don't forget that we won North Carolina by just 14,000 votes. Now, that’s just five votes per precinct. You understand what I'm getting at? (Applause.) You understand how real these numbers -- how doable that is with focus?
 
And just think about this room. You all know somebody who is not registered to vote, not focused, doesn't understand the issues completely, doesn't know -- we all know those people. They're in our church. They're on our boards. They're our colleagues. They're our neighbors. They're in our -- they're in every aspect of our lives.
 
So starting the minute you get up out of your seats, we need you to get out there and get your 36 votes. Get your five votes. Just think about it. Get your five votes. (Applause.) We talk about it -- it takes one. Look at this room. (Applause.) Look at just this room. And if everybody is that focused between now and November 6th, if everybody who feels the passion of this convention and understands what's at stake is really willing to do that hard work -- reach out to the people in their lives and explain these issues, and understand what this election means for women, for our children, for our daughters, then we will win this.
 
But you have to do that. And you cannot stop until the polls close on November the 6th. (Applause.) Because what we do every day for the next 61 days is going to make the difference between waking up on November 7th and asking ourselves, could we have done more, or feeling the promise of four more years. That's the difference.
 
So let me just ask you, do you understand the charge?
 
AUDIENCE: Yes!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Are you feeling fired up about the charge?
 
AUDIENCE: Yes!
 
MRS. OBAMA: Are you feeling ready to go about the charge? (Applause.) Because if you haven't noticed, I'm pretty fired up and ready to go myself. (Applause.)
 
I look forward to seeing you all out there on the campaign trail. Let's get this done, women! (Applause.)
 
Thank you so much. We love you. God bless.
 
END
11:54 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 September 06, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at a Service Project
Charlotte Convention Center
Charlotte, North Carolina
10:22 A.M. EDT
MRS. BIDEN:  Good morning.  I just want to thank you all for coming and helping today.  And thank you so much to the USO, who always does such wonderful things for our troops.  Michelle and I are inspired every day by the courage and the strength and resilience of our military families, and we’ve had the honor of working together to help promote programs for our military.  So we’re working hard, right, Michelle?
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Yes, indeed.  A lot of progress.
 
MRS. BIDEN:  So, anyway, I’d like to introduce our First Lady, Michelle Obama, who was worked tirelessly for our military families.  So thank you, Michelle.  (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thanks, Jill.  All right, so this is really good because I see a lot of my friends and family who are here -- actually working, which is a very good thing.  (Laughter.)  As Jill said, we are delighted to be here.
 
This has become a convention tradition.  And it’s also become kind of a friends-and-family tradition that when we come together for big events like this, that we find ways to give back.  I know that my brother has brought his entire team to D.C. and we’ve done work in food pantries, and I just want to thank you all for taking the time to be a part of giving back, even at a time when we’re focused on the Party and the President and speeches.  Events like this remind us really why we’re here, why we’re doing this.
 
And I want to echo Jill in thanking the USO, because they’ve been just a phenomenal partner.  I mean, the truth is we can shine a spotlight on the service and sacrifice of our military families, our veterans, our servicemembers, but organizations like the USO are doing the hard work on the ground every single day, and they prop us up in so many ways.  So let’s give them a round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
And I also just want to take a second to thank somebody who is here, a behind-the-scenes kind of guy -- Steve Kerrigan, who has been the CEO for the convention, who has done -- (applause) -- Steve has done an amazing, amazing job.  This has been a phenomenal few days here in Charlotte.  (Applause.)  And I want to thank you and your team for putting together an excellent several days here.
 
Today, this service project caps off 4,000 hours of community service, and that was part of what Steve and the rest of the organizers wanted to make sure.  When we come into a city like this, we take it over.  (Laughter.)  We inconvenience people.  We make it hard for people to walk around and breathe and get to work. 
 
So our view was that while we’re here on the ground -- and the team has been here on the ground for months.  Everybody who has worked on the convention has made a commitment to give back to this community in varying ways, and we’ve surpassed our goal of 4,000 hours of service to the Charlotte community.  And I am very proud of our team for making that commitment and achieving that accomplishment.  (Applause.)
 
So you all are helping us to continue that goal.  And again, thank you.  I hope you’re having fun.  Kids, I hope you all working -- (laughter) -- doing some work.  So Jill and I are going to come out there and join you.
 
Thanks so much.  Take care.  (Applause.) 
 
END
10:26 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 14, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Tallwood High School Graduation Ceremony
Tallwood High School
Virginia Beach, Virginia
1:44 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)  Thank you all very much.  It’s an honor to be here.
Madam President, thank you for that introduction.  And, parents, grandparents, family members, administrators, faculty, and as I said, the school board -- the most important thankless job in America -- thank you for doing it.  To all of you assembled here to celebrate today with the graduating class of 2012, I’m flattered you’d invite me to be here.
It’s great to be in a town that has such respect for our military and such great tradition, and such a wonderful group of graduates.  I want you to raise your hand, you graduates, if any of you have family members serving in the United States military.  (Applause.)
I want to ask the rest of the audience, sitting in the bleachers, how many of you have served in the military and served overseas?  Please stand.  (Applause.)  We owe you.  We owe you big.
Graduates, since 9/11, over 2,800,000 of your parents and older brothers and sisters and people like them have joined the United States military.  More than half of them -- more than half of them have been in and out of Afghanistan and Iraq, many of them multiple times.  Your parents and siblings put their lives on the line for this country.  And they were asked to do so much more than just fight.  You’re inheriting an incredible tradition, because they were asked to take on responsibilities beyond their base or battlefield.  Young men and women that I have witnessed more than two dozen times, steeped in military doctrine, have had to master the intricacies of tribal politics, deal with issues ranging from lack of electricity to unemployment, to currency exchange to taxation.  It’s a remarkable, remarkable group of military men and women we have today -- the finest generation of warriors in the history of not only the United States, but the history of the world.  So thank you all who have served.   (Applause.)
And thank all of you who served as well when they were abroad -- the families.  There’s a great phrase from a famous British poet.  He said, “They also serve who only stand and wait.”  They also serve who only stand and wait.  My son, Beau Biden, spent a year in Iraq, and I watched the impact on my grandchildren -- the games missed, the birthdays missed, the Christmases missed, the empty seat at Thanksgiving dinner.  So from the bottom of my heart, on behalf of a grateful nation, I thank all of you who are the brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, spouses of those who have put themselves in harm’s way in the last decade and beyond.  Thank you, thank you, thank you.  (Applause.)
And I’m told -- I’m told that 37 of you graduating today will leave here today and enlist in the United States military.  Thank you as well.  (Applause.)  Thank you for the service you’re going to render. 
And I want you all to know that your nation stands with you, and will stand with you every step of the way in your career.
And I want to, Madam Principal, commend this school for teaching so many of these students a larger lesson than just mastering their studies.  Because one of the things you all have learned here is that in order for this nation to lead the world and you to be leaders in the world, you have to understand the world.  You have to participate in the world.  So I was so impressed by 76 members of this graduating class who took part in the Global Studies and World Languages Academy, most of you learning to speak two or more languages -- two languages.  I was told one student -- nine.  You’ve had a chance to put those language skills to the test by video-conferencing with others halfway around the world.  And I guarantee you most of you will have a chance to put it to the test on the foreign soil of the language you’ve mastered.  We will need you -- need you -- there.
You studied global governments and global culture.  You studied people and their backgrounds, their heritages; learned to respect different viewpoints, and most of all, you’ve gained perspective, whether it’s in the service of your family or in participating in a program.  And that matters.
No one can tell you how small the world has become better than those who raised their hands a few moments ago who served abroad.  As this world of ours continues to shrink, what happens in a remote province in Pakistan, Nigeria, Brazil is known around the world in a matter of minutes.  The democratic movement that swept across the Middle East -- the so-called Arab Spring -- began when a lowly fruit vendor set himself ablaze to protest a corrupt government, igniting a confrontation magnified by social media that literally set off a revolution that was waiting to happen for well over 200 years.
Graduates, today, the notion of isolation is obsolete, even in those places where it is still desired.  But here’s the thing:  As the world continues to shrink, the cultural divides that have separated us do not shrink.  The lines marking cultural and religious differences do not blur.  In fact, those lines become more stark as we confront those differences up close.  After all, the same technology that can inspire a democratic revolution across the Middle East, well, it can spread gossip, innuendo and lies around the world just as rapidly.
To state the obvious, technology, no matter how far or how fast it evolves, is only a tool.  And your generation’s greatest challenge, in my view, will be learning how to deploy that tool -- this emerging technology -- wisely.  Deploying it wisely means infusing technology with our oldest values -- values that you have learned here.  The values of tolerance, respect, understanding:  These are not some obsolete, old notions that don’t matter anymore.  The more advanced and shrunk the world becomes, the more critical those values become.  They mean more than ever.
There’s a lot of talk these days -- you hear it in a cacophony of voices -- that America’s future is not as bright as its past.  Well, I’m here to tell you, don’t believe it for a moment.  Class of 2012, you’re going to live through a period of the most remarkable and rapid technological, scientific and medical breakthroughs in the history of mankind.  And we -- you -- are going to lead those changes from the United States of America.
So don’t give in to the cynicism, the pettiness, the negativity that you see and hear all around you, that pervades our public discourse.  Believe in yourself, because you have reason to.  And believe, because there’s no reason not to believe in the continued promise of this great country.  Think big and imagine.  That’s my simple advice to you today:  Think big and imagine.
Imagine the progress you will see and achieve in your lifetime.  Imagine those breakthroughs that are just on the horizon and just beyond it.  Imagine the day, and it will occur within your lifetime -- it will occur in all probability before you have children -- when doctors can engineer your white blood cells to attack cancer tumors and leave healthy cells untouched, allowing cancer patients to live a full life without undergoing the difficult, painful and costly chemotherapy and radiation procedure.
Imagine the day when doctors will be able -- and they will in your lifetime -- be able to regenerate organs and limbs that have been damaged or lost, not only saving tens of thousands of lives, but giving back our wounded warriors control, full control, of their lives again.
Imagine the day when you fly and we have an aircraft that flies at Mach 20 and able to literally travel anywhere in the world within one to two hours.  That will happen in your near lifetime.
Imagine the day when we can detect an IED from 100 meters or more away, or when our soldiers can wear a lightweight vest even stronger than Kevlar that can literally stop armor-piercing bullets. 
Imagine being able to power your home at a fraction of the cost of what your parents now pay, because your home will be powered by solar shingles that cost no more than the shingles on your parents’ home today.
Hunger vanquished because crops will not need to depend on the quality of the soil; the same amount of water, fertilizer, and pesticides to thrive.  Famine a memory, and with it so much war and conflict.  Medicine personalized to your human genome, which is literally around the corner.  New super lightweight building materials; cleaner fuels, electric vehicles able to go at equivalent of 100 miles or more to a gallon, and free us from our dependence on foreign oil and all the obligations that flow from that.  Imagine that and so much more that I promise you, I promise you, is within your reach.
In this new world, so much is going to be possible.  The United States is, at this moment, as the former Secretary of State said, and I quote, the “indispensable nation,” not because we’re perfect -- because we aren’t -- but because we’re tolerant, because we reach out to others, because we understand we can’t waste anyone’s talents.  And that makes you the indispensable generation.  You will be in the forefront as we rebuild this nation’s economy and restore the middle class, as we leave behind two wars. 
You will be in the forefront of shaping whether the age in front of us is an age of deepening conflict or increasing tolerance.  And that will be determined in large part by you continuing to develop what you’ve already begun to learn -- the ability to discern between what is noble and what is ignoble; between what is pure arrogance and what is done genuinely to help the lives of human beings; your ability and willingness to recognize that people pursue truth in different ways; and maybe most of all, you will need that innate skepticism about those who claim they are the sole arbiters of what is true and what is right. 
As you hone these skills, you will not only determine the future of our country; you will define its very heart and soul.  It’s like the slogan of your class says:  You guys are “ahead of the curve.”  You all have what it takes.  I am absolutely confident in your ability to meet the challenges I have laid out head on, and to bend them -- to bend them -- to your will in your and our moral precepts.  I’m confident of that because of where you come from, how you were raised, what you learned at this fine school, but most of all because who you are. 
Meeting challenges head on has been the story of the history of the journey of America.  And more is being placed on you, in terms of opportunity and obligation, than any generation before you.  America is literally counting on you, and we believe deeply in you. 
So congratulations, Tallwood High School Class of 2012.  May God bless you, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you.  (Applause.) 
END
2:01 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 04, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Cypress Bay High School Graduation Ceremony
Marlins Park
Miami, Florida
5:18 P.M. EST
THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you all very much. (Applause.) Please, please be seated.
As a kid, this was my dream, standing at home plate at a major league ballpark, not as a speaker but as a batter. But I had to settle for becoming Vice President. (Laughter.)
Ladies and gentlemen, parents, the graduating class, grandparents, brothers and sisters, what a great day for all of you, the parents of those graduating today. To you, Principal Neely, affectionately known as the “Big Kahuna” -- (laughter) -- to the administrators, the faculty, this entire community, this is truly a remarkable school. What you’ve built in 10 years is amazing.
When Debbie asked me a while ago whether I would come down and be your commencement speaker, I was honored. But as she started to tell me about the school, I began to wonder whether or not she was just overselling to get me to come the day after my daughter’s wedding.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, you are absolutely amazing, and nothing is more amazing than you students. (Applause.) Class of 2012, you are a remarkable, remarkable group of graduates. (Applause.)
As we’ve heard from your principal, you haven’t just distinguished yourself on the field; you’ve distinguished yourself in every field: soccer championships, tennis championships, math championships, more AP tests than I can count and nationally ranked debaters.
More importantly, from my observation, it’s the atmosphere you’ve created here that has enabled you to excel; an atmosphere of acceptance and support for one another; a cohesion that is rare in any school, much less a school as big as this one.
If you can take that attitude with you –- the attitude where you don’t simply tolerate differences of background and opinion, you accept it, you even solicit the differences -- if you can take that with you, it will be one of the keys for your success in life, because there is nothing, nothing your world is going to need more than being able to accept, support, and work with people with very different views.
As the world shrinks, what happens in a remote province of Pakistan or Nigeria or Brazil is known by the entire world within a matter of minutes. The democratic movement that has swept across the Middle East, the so-called Arab Spring, began when a simple fruit vendor set himself on fire to protest a corrupt government. And a wildfire spread across a quarter of the world, a confrontation that was magnified by social media, and has set off a revolution. Isolation is obsolete today, even where it may still be desired.
But here’s the thing: As the world shrinks, the cultural divides in the world do not shrink. The lines marking cultural and religious differences do not blur. In fact, those lines become more stark as we confront those differences up close.
And those lines don’t have to be halfway across the world. You know that. They can be in your neighborhood or in your school. You can see them in the hallways, in the cafeteria, in the locker next to yours.
At the same time, the same technology that can inspire a democratic movement across the Middle East -- well, it can also bring a school or a community together or it can tear it apart. Information today moves fast, and the world you’re about to enter it will move even faster.
But so does gossip. You can build lifelong friendships and loyalties or tear someone down. Tolerance, respect and understanding are not some obsolete old notions that don’t matter anymore. In the new world you’re inheriting, they will matter more than they ever did in the history of mankind.
You know, there’s a lot of talk these days that America’s future is not as bright as its past. But I’m here to tell you don’t believe that not for a single moment. Class of 2012, you’re going to live through a period of the most remarkable and rapid technological, scientific and medical breakthroughs in the history of mankind. And we’re going to lead those changes from America. And you’re going to lead those changes as you leave this school.
So, don’t sell yourself short. Don’t think small. Don’t give in to the cynicism, the pettiness and the negativity that so often pervades our public discourse. Believe in yourself, and believe in the promise of this country.
And, imagine. That’s my simple advice to you today: Imagine. Imagine the progress you will see and achieve in your lifetime. Imagine the breakthroughs that are on the horizon and just beyond it.
Imagine, by the time you’re in a position to buy your first home, putting a roof of solar shingles that will cost no more than today’s ordinary shingles, will be able to power your home –- heating, cooling, running appliances -- at a fraction of the cost your parents pay today.
Imagine a day within your lifetime when doctors can and will engineer your white blood cells to attack cancer cells, and leave healthy cells untouched, allowing cancer patients to live out a full life without undergoing the difficulties some of you observe -- painful chemotherapy and radiation procedures.
Imagine the day, when in your lifetimes, doctors are able to regenerate entire body organs and limbs that have been damaged and lost -- not only saving tens of thousands of lives, but restoring the thousands of our Iraq and Afghan veterans coming back in need of prostheses, so they’ll be able to live a full and ambulatory life.
 
As an aside, in the future -- just one example -- using 3D printers, we’re going to be able to restore tissue after traumatic injury or a burn, restore it back to its original state. It’s literally around the corner.
Imagine a world in which hunger is vanquished by crops that don’t depend on the soil, water, or fertilizer or pesticides to thrive. They’re just around the corner. Imagine famine being a memory, and with it, the end of so much war and conflict that plagues so many parts of the world.
 
Imagine a world in which nations no longer depend on nuclear weapons for their defense.
 
And imagine a day when the lightweight materials, cleaner fuels, advanced engines simultaneously make our air cleaner, allowing us to go the equivalent of hundreds of miles to the gallon and maybe most importantly, freeing us from our dependence on foreign oil and all that entails for our nation. And imagine when your “senior spots” are all charging stations, powering up cars that can go hundreds of miles on a single charge.
 
What we imagine today, you will build tomorrow. And when you do, it will be revolutionary not only for your generation, but for this nation.
In this new world, you have a great advantage over so many others. And that advantage was instilled in you right here at Cypress Bay. You may not have seen it, you may not have recognized it, known it was even happening -- but it was, because beyond your academic excellence, here is what will separate those of you who will succeed from those of who will fail. And that is your ability to be able to discern between what’s noble and what is ignoble, between what is pure arrogance and what is done to genuinely help the lives of human beings.
You will need an appreciation and a capacity for tolerance, a tolerance of different traditions and different views. You will need an ability and a willingness to recognize that people pursue truth in different ways. You will need an innate skepticism about those who claim they have the answer when it comes to what is true and right.
The United States is at this moment, as a former President said, and I quote, “the indispensable nation,” not because we’re perfect, but because we’re tolerant, because we’re open. We reach out to others. We understand we cannot afford to waste anyone’s talents. And what makes -- and that’s the very thing that makes you the “indispensable generation”.
You’ll be at the forefront as we leave two wars behind us. You will be at the forefront in shaping whether the age in front of us is an age of deepening conflict or increasing tolerance. You will be determining not only the future of this country, but what its heart and soul is.
That’s why I started this speech by saying that what is most remarkable about you is the atmosphere of acceptance and support for one another, tolerance. I said at the beginning that technological change can cause cultural clashes. When I was a kid in grade school, it was the television that showed all of America how black America was being treated. When Bull Connor sicced his dogs on women and children peacefully assembling in their Sunday best, it awakened an entire nation and inspired my generation, a generation most of whom had never seen anything like that before.
 
And many people of my parents’ generation and mine wondered, would we ever be able to bring this country together, to live together? Would we ever be able to have real equality in the face of that kind of brutality that the television screen brought into our living rooms?
The Civil Rights movement -- which I was involved in, in my little small way at home -- reached a calamitous point when I was graduating from law school. Dr. Martin Luther king was assassinated in Memphis three months before my graduation day. There were riots in many cities in America, including my own. Wilmington, Delaware was burning. As a young public defender, I still imagined, with my generation, that we could heal this God-awful situation; that we could rise out of the ashes, and maybe find a way out together.
But the cynics told us we couldn’t. Then, 40 years from the time Dr. King was assassinated, I was standing on a railroad platform in Wilmington, Delaware. It was a January 17th, 2009 -- a bitter, cold, but glorious day. Thousands of people were in the streets of Wilmington and the parking lots, waiting for the same thing I was.
As I stood on that platform and waited, I looked out over my city -- a part of the city that was in chaos when I had returned 40 years earlier, when I imagined and prayed we could live together. I was standing there with those thousands of other people, waiting for a man on a train coming from Philadelphia to pick me up and take me a short 125-mile train ride, a ride I had literally taken several thousand times before as a U.S. senator, to Washington D.C.; only, this time, for a very different purpose, I was being picked up by a friend, and African American friend. Barack Obama. (Applause.)
We were taking -- regardless of your politics; this is not a political comment. It’s about transition in America. We were taking that short ride to be sworn in as President and Vice President of the United States of America. Not only can and do we live together -- we now govern together. That much can change in 40 years. Just think what’s going to change in the next 40 years of your life. (Applause.)
This is a good country. This is a decent and noble country. Your generation will take on the task entrusted to each generation, to give meaning to the central words -– the central challenge -– of our Constitution: “to form a more perfect union.” Because that’s what our country’s journey is all about. That’s what your journey is all about: to form a more perfect union.
And you start this journey better equipped than any graduation class that has come before you. You have the power to create more than the perfect union, and that power resides in you. Not in a laboratory. Not in a computer. But inside you. Don’t forget it. Remember what you learned here about decency, tolerance, reaching out, embracing differences. And if you do, my country, our country, will continue to be the greatest country in the history of mankind.
Congratulations, Cypress Bay [High School] Class of 2012. (Applause.)
END
5:38 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 26, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden at the Commencement Ceremony of the United States Military Academy
United States Military Academy
West Point, New York  
10:22 A.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  It’s a great honor to be here. 
Distinguished guests; soldiers and officers, friends and family of those graduating today, academy faculty and staff and, most of all, cadets on the cusp of being commissioned in the United States Army, it is an honor -- it is an honor -- to be here on this magnificent campus whose graduates for more than two centuries have played a leading role in nearly every chapter of our nation’s history.
Before there was a military academy here on the Hudson, before even the United States was the United States of America, at the height of the Revolutionary War, General George Washington considered West Point so strategically vital he called it the “key to the continent.”
Ladies and gentlemen, I would respectfully stipulate that West Point is even more important to our nation today.  The 1,032 cadets gathered here are the key -- the key -- to whatever challenges the world has in store.
The Class of 2012, four years ago you were among the most promising high school graduates on the planet; your future limited only by the reach of your imaginations, but at an age when no one would have blamed you for having no idea what you wanted to do with your lives, and in an era when the sacrifice required of our military had never been greater, you chose –- you chose -- to turn your considerable talents, your strength of purpose, but even more importantly, the strength of your intellects to serving your country and enrolling at the Academy, that, for all its merits, is no one’s idea of an easy ride.
That choice is your class motto: “For more than ourselves.”  For more than ourselves.  Just imagine what this world would be if it adopted that same notion.  You have.
And because of you, because you do dedicate yourself, while thousands of colleges and universities across America are proudly celebrating graduations today and throughout the year and any time this year, only at West Point, and the other outstanding service academies, does the entire United States of America swell with pride at the accomplishment you’re celebrating today.  (Applause.)   All of America.
No one is prouder, of course, than your families, and deservedly so.  Military service is by its very nature, as anyone who has ever worn the uniform knows, by its very nature a family endeavor.
Among you are 426 cadets with a military parent, including 80 of you with a mother or father who has graduated from this very academy.
Then there is Cadet Adam Scott, of Lorton, Virginia, who graduates today.  (Applause.)  He was preceded at West Point by two grandfathers; his father, Bruce; his sisters Katherine and Kerney and his brother Andrew.  (Applause.)   Adam, I guess Annapolis was never much of a choice for you.  (Laughter.)  
Same goes for Cadets Brian and Larry LoRusso.  (Applause.)  Two lacrosse stars from Rocky Point, New York.  Celebrating with us today is his brother Kevin, who graduated from West Point in ’09, another brother Nick, who graduated five years ago and is watching as I speak all the way from Bagram Air Force Base in Afghanistan.  (Applause.)
Cadets, let’s give a shout-out for Nick and all the other warriors in Afghanistan!  They’re incredible.  (Applause.)
You’re about to join the finest warriors in history, and they’re out there now.  May God go with them.
Today, as each of you awaits the officer’s oath that will take you across one great threshold in American life, on behalf of President Obama, your Commander-in-Chief, your entire government, and I believe the entire nation, it is my honor to simply say congratulations.  Congratulations.  (Applause.) 
Savor the moment.  You’ve earned this.  Savor this day.  You’ll remember it the rest of your lives.
Every cadet passing through these halls; every hapless plebe rubbing General Sedgwick’s spurs for good luck; every firstie forged through this crucible called West Point; everyone who ever touched the George C. Marshall plaque in the stadium and thought, when the time comes, I’ll be ready for that mission, whatever it might be; every single generation that has preceded you at West Point has faced daunting challenges upon receiving its commissions, especially in times of war.  But your generation, the 9/11 Generation, is more than worthy of the proud legacy that you will inherit today.
Most of you were in elementary school on September 11, 2001, when your nation was attacked; old enough to remember, perhaps, but young enough that that tragic day need not have shaped your lives.  But for so many of you, it did just that.
As you and your immediate predecessors came of age, 2,800,000 of you were moved to join our military, knowing full well that you were likely to be deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan.  As General Odierno and I have talked often on my multiple trips to Afghanistan[sic] with him, hundreds of thousands of you have laced up those combat boots and walked across those barren deserts and snow-capped mountains where 24 members of this graduating class have already served.  (Applause.)
Cadet Ben Ordiway served in Iraq during some of the darkest days of that war.  (Applause.)  When his first sergeant recommended that he apply for West Point, he spent two weeks studying for the SAT at FOB Caldwell; hopped on a roundtrip flight to Baghdad to take the exam.  I’d call that an unusual testing environment.  (Laughter.)  Very few applicants have to solve math problems and write essays while taking incoming mortar fire.  (Laughter.)
Indeed, the challenges these wars present to young warriors are perhaps the most daunting in our nation’s history because in addition to fighting for your country, your predecessors and you will be asked to do so much more.
You are asked to take on tasks once reserved only for those with years of seniority and take on responsibilities far beyond the base or the battlefield.
Young men and women steeped in military doctrine have had to master the intricacies of tribal politics, deal with issues ranging from electricity to unemployment, currency exchange to taxation.  You are a remarkable, remarkable, remarkable group.
It has been one of the singular honors of my life to be assigned by President Obama to oversee our policy in Iraq, to see firsthand the accomplishments of our warriors during my multiple trips in and out of Afghanistan and Iraq as both a U.S. senator, and as Vice President.
President Obama and I came to office determined to end the war in Iraq responsibly, and today our troops are home.  (Applause.)
Last December, after nine long years, I had the great privilege –- the great privilege of standing before our commanders and troops in Baghdad on the eve of their departure. And as I told them that day:  “In the finest American tradition, having carried out your mission, you’re leaving.  Taking nothing with you but your experiences, your achievements, and the pride associated with a hard job well done.”
That’s what America does.  (Applause.)
In Afghanistan, President Obama laid out a clear strategy.  Our commanders refocused and redoubled their efforts on disrupting, dismantling and ultimately destroying -- defeating al Qaeda, reversing the Taliban’s momentum and training the Afghan Security Forces to prevent extremists from gaining ground.  Since then, we’ve taken out -- you have taken out more than half of al Qaeda’s senior leadership.
And in a mission that will go down in the annals of intelligence and special operations, some of America’s most gifted security professionals tracked down Osama bin Laden -- after the trail had gone cold.  And in one of the most incredibly daring raids, they delivered justice to the architect of a harmful ideology -- a hateful ideology with no place in the modern world and the man responsible for the deaths of almost 3,000 innocents on our soil.  They got him.  (Applause. 
And in the process, those warriors sent a message to the world that if you harm America, we will follow you to the end of the Earth.  (Applause.)
And now, as you saw at NATO -- the NATO Conference in Chicago earlier this week, the President has formed a consensus among the 50 nations at our side on how best to responsibly end this war and bring our young men and women home.
The entire surge announced by President Obama in his speech right here on this campus in Eisenhower Hall will return this summer.  And our drawdown will continue thereafter, even as we continue to build up Afghanistani forces so they can assume full responsibility for their country.
The cost of these wars, the longest in our nation’s history, have been extraordinary -- 4,422 service members, 4,422 Fallen Angels, have paid the ultimate price in Afghanistan [sic]; 1,868 in Afghanistan; and more than 30,000 have been injured, some of whom will require medical care for the rest of their lives.
And here at this citadel of American virtue, 87 Fallen Angels in the West Point family, including Second Lieutenant David Rylander, whom some of you knew, and who was killed earlier this month in an IED attack in Afghanistan.
Our hearts go out to his family.  The President and I,  indeed all Americans, stand in awe of -- in awe of his and all that went before him’s commitment and to their sacrifice.
Our country owes these heroes and their families a debt of gratitude we will never be able to fully repay, but one that we will never forget because institutions like this continue to stand -- one that we honor today.  And here at this academy and every other academy and every place where military personnel gather, we’ll never forget.  We remember every day.
Winding down these long wars is enabling us to replace and rebalance our foreign policy, to take on the full range of challenges that will shape the 21st century, challenges different than those of the 20th century.
When President Obama and I came to office, we were convinced that our nation had reached a strategic turning point, requiring us to rebalance our foreign policy.  While we will maintain a substantial, vigilant presence in the Middle East -- and partners with the Afghanis -- that will outlast our combat mission, we are now able to begin to focus our attention and resources on other regions and other challenges that will be incredibly critical to our nation’s future in the 21st century.
We are revitalizing America’s alliances, and particularly NATO, the greatest military alliance the world has ever known because -- because, as the President has rightly said, Europe is the cornerstone of our engagement with the world.
We learned during the Libya campaign, which saved thousands of innocents and helped topple a murderous dictator, that there is almost nothing -- nothing we cannot accomplish when NATO and our partners act decisively, and when we actually share the burden of the responsibility.
And at this week’s Summit in NATO -- excuse me, in Chicago, NATO strengthened its defense capabilities for the years ahead, including adding equipment it had not had, only we had, by acquiring a fleet of unmanned aircraft for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.
Rebalancing our foreign policy also means refocusing on the most dynamic region of the world’s economy, the global economy, Asia.  The United States has long been and will remain a Pacific power and a critical provider of peace, prosperity and security of this vital region.
The most critical relationship to get right is that between the United States and China.  Every day, the affairs of our nations and the livelihoods of our citizens grow more connected.
How we manage this relationship between the world’s two largest economy, although we’re still almost three times as large as theirs, how we do this will help shape the 21st century.
This obviously doesn’t mean we’ll always see eye-to-eye, including on issues like human rights.  Nor does it mean we will not compete with each other economically.  As I said when I was in China, we Americans welcome this competition, which drives us to do better, and to be better because there’s no doubt that America can compete, and America will win whenever, and wherever, the playing field is level.  (Applause.)
Ultimately, that is what America is focused on in the Asia Pacific, empowering cooperative relationships, clear rules of the road so that that region can continue its peaceful development, and that our people can prosper.
We’ve also forged stronger relationships with emerging powers like India, Russia, Brazil, Turkey, South Africa; and all of these efforts are helping advance American interests at home and around the world. 
Add to that, that we dealt with potentially the gravest threat to mankind.  We’ve reduced our reliance on nuclear weapons and the size of our arsenal, and in the New START Treaty we got the Russians to reduce theirs as well.
We brought the world together to secure nuclear materials and prevent those materials from getting into the hands of terrorists, and we isolated countries like Iran and North Korea whose nuclear programs threaten not only us, but world peace and stability. 
At the same time we demonstrated that we don’t have to choose between protecting our country and living the values we preach.  We shut down secret prisons overseas and we banned torture.  It was the right thing to do.  It enhanced our power of our persuasion around the world, and the security of our soldiers around the world.
President Obama also knew we needed to ensure our military was postured to meet these new objectives and new challenges.  And just as General George C. Marshall wanted a West Point graduate for that pivotal mission, when World War II hung in the balance, President Obama determined that we needed a new defense strategy to meet the needs of this country, and he turned, as Marshall called for -- turned to graduates of this great institution and other service academies.
He turned to men like Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Martin Dempsey, West Point Class of ’76; and General Ray Odierno, Chief of Staff of the Army, Class of ’74.  The defense strategy they crafted provided a more agile, flexible force prepared for future challenges, better able to confront aggressors and project power, with strong partnerships to share the burden and smart investments in cutting-edge capabilities. 
And we proposed a budget to fund that strategy, a budget that not only funds the strategy but first and foremost keeps faith with our wounded warriors, our veterans and their families because in America we all know our government has only one truly sacred obligation:  Prepare those we send to war and care for their families and them when they come home.  (Applause.)
No one knows better than this audience that America’s unique role in the world requires that we maintain the world’s finest fighting force.  That’s a non-negotiable issue. And that’s exactly what this strategy does.
West Point has prepared you to lead us to face these new challenges, some of which we have yet to even contemplate, let alone encounter.  Because as I said at the start, you are not only strong and committed, you are also some of our nation’s sharpest minds, with the training to take today’s missions -- counterinsurgency, counterterrorism, training foreign armies -- and the minds to adapt to tomorrow’s horizons, from cyberspace to outer space.
There is such a proud history here.  Such a proud tradition.  And I have no doubt that many of you in this class are not only going to make extraordinary contributions to the military but also to civilian life because West Point is in the business of producing -- not only great officers –- it produces great leaders and great Americans.
As President Theodore Roosevelt said, upon West Point’s Centennial, 110 years ago next month, he said:  “Your duty here at West Point has been to fit men to do well in war.  But it is a noteworthy fact that you also have fitted them to do singularly well in peace.  The highest positions in the land have been held, not exceptionally, but again and again by West Pointers.”  West Pointers who have risen to the first rank in all occupations of civilian life.
Were he here today he’d only alter that quote slightly – young men and women are prepared to do that.  (Applause.)
The Class of 2012, this is your destiny, to lead your country; for you are the leaders of your generation, that 9/11 Generation, which I predict will go down in history as the finest generation this nation has produced.  (Applause.)
I’ve had many honors as Vice President of the United States, but none greater than being able to salute you today.  May God Bless you and protect you and may God protect and bless all those who wear the uniform of the United States of America.
Congratulations.  (Applause.)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 11, 2012
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Southwestern Community College Commencement
Southwestern Community College Commencement
Creston, Iowa
May 11, 2012
As Prepared for Delivery
Good evening, everyone! 
It’s wonderful to be here in Iowa to celebrate such an important day with all of you. 
Thank you, Dr. Crittenden, for that very kind introduction. 
Erica, thank you for your wonderful remarks – we’re so glad you’re recovering from the injuries caused by the tornado. 
I know you’ve all had a tough month since the storm. 
I also know that the community support in the aftermath has been incredible … hundreds of volunteers showing up to help in the clean-up so that everyone could get back to class.  What an inspiring community!
Some of you know my story.  I’ve been a teacher for more than 30 years, and I continue to teach full-time at a community college in Northern Virginia, just outside of Washington, DC. 
In fact, just last week I finished my semester.  And while I’m happy to be done, I know I will miss my students.  I imagine many of your professors feel the same way. 
And I can imagine how you students feel.  Proud.  Relieved.  And, yes – excited about the next challenge. 
When I’m not in the classroom teaching, I’m often on the road visiting community colleges.  Earlier this year, Labor Secretary Hilda Solis and I toured five states to see some of the incredible industry partnerships that are helping students, employers, and communities all over the country.
What I’ve seen at every community college I have visited over the last four years is the story of hope.
Hope for workers, who have gone as far as they can go in their jobs … and are getting the skills they need to go on to the next level.
Hope for moms, juggling kids and a job, learning new skills for a new career.
Hope for recent high school graduates, taking that critical step toward a four-year degree.
Hope for people in their forties, fifties and even sixties – who have been out of work so long that they’ve nearly given up – getting the second chance they deserve. 
Some of these descriptions may sound familiar to you.
College is a place that changes lives, for the better.  I’ve seen it firsthand. 
From my perspective as a teacher, it’s easy for me to see how my students change.  But one thing I’ve realized is that the students don’t always see it in themselves. 
Every day, you’re working hard.  Every day, you’re learning something new.  Every day, you’re investing in yourselves.
So as you’re finishing all those papers and finals and projects, you might not realize the dramatic progress that you’ve achieved.
What you’ve done these past few years – putting in all those hours – has given you the tools to build a career and pursue the life you’ve dreamed of.
As you embark on that journey, there are three lessons I’ve learned that I’d like to share with you.  Three lessons that really stand out to me.  Three lessons that can apply wherever you are in life – inside or outside a classroom.
They are pretty simple.
The first is: lift up others.
That’s something Eric Mahoney’s been doing for years.
Eric’s no stranger to service.  A 12-year U.S Army veteran, Eric served in Bosnia and in Iraq for three tours of duty before his honorable discharge in 2008.
When he got home, Eric knew he wanted to keep helping others so he went to work in a hospital.  Then in 2010 he lost his job – but he never lost his spirit. 
Later that year, he enrolled at Southwestern where he’s kept on helping others.  Through the TRiO Student Support Services program, Eric has tutored his fellow students in math courses – from algebra to trigonometry.
Eric, a dad of three “wonderful” kids, is graduating today with his associate of arts degree.  He will begin classes at Iowa State this summer toward his bachelor’s in electrical engineering. 
Eric’s not the only graduate in the family.  His wife, Stephanie, is also graduating.  She wants to go on to get her bachelor’s and eventually become a social worker.
Eric and Stephanie, thank you for your service to our country, and congratulations.
The second lesson is: go to your strength.
This is about following your heart, and trusting yourself to do whatever it is that you know you do best.
Keenan Joiner originally came to Southwestern to pursue basketball.  But during his time here, he has succeeded not only on the basketball court, but also in the classroom. 
As captain of the basketball team, Keenan says he believed he should be responsible for setting the tone for his teammates in athletics – and academics.
Not only has he set the tone, he has done a lot to make the team successful.  Keenan led the team in assists – pretty rare for a forward.  But Keenan’s strength is making everyone around him better – so that’s what he does.
And that’s what he’ll do after graduation, too.  Keenan is headed to Grand View University in Des Moines where he will study sports physiology – and keep making his teammates better on the basketball court.
The final lesson is: never stop learning.
I always say my students are my heroes.  It’s true – every day I am in the classroom, I’m learning from them.  And I am inspired … by their hard work, by their dedication, and by their sacrifice.
For nearly 19 years, Donna Larkin commuted to her job in Red Oak.  During that time, she became a single parent to her daughter, Jessica.  And her life became more challenging when she was laid off after the CDS Red Oak plant closed.
After evaluating her options, Donna decided to go back to school for something she’s loved since she was a kid – automotive.  She says she used to drive her dad – a retired auto mechanic – crazy with all her questions about how everything worked.
Donna received a diploma in “collision repair and refinish” last June.  This year, she will earn her associate of applied science degree in “collision repair and refinish.” 
And because Southwestern offers an option to gain more skills with another year of training, she will return this fall to obtain the associate of applied science in automotive repair technology.  Now her dad’s going to have to start asking her the questions.
When Donna graduates, she plans to work for an auto shop in the Villisca area.  Donna has never stopped learning – and is well on her way toward her ultimate goal of owning and running her own shop.
Donna, congratulations. I’m so proud of you – and I know your daughter Jessica, and your grandchildren – Syril and Liz – have a great role model to look up to.
…Lift up others
…Always go to your strength
…And never stop learning
Three lessons to live by…
Three lessons exemplified by all the graduates in this room.  All of you.
Because no matter how hard it got…and I know there’ve been hard times…you never lost your faith in yourself and what you can do. 
Maybe you took a chance.  Maybe you learned something new.  Maybe you discovered a strength you never knew you had. 
But one thing is for certain – whatever it was that got you here today – it’s lifting up all of us.  Making us better.  As individuals.  As communities.  As a country.
I will close with a quote by Michelangelo.
Most people think of the famous ceiling of the Sistine Chapel when they hear the name Michelangelo.  But interestingly enough, Michelangelo resisted painting – he considered himself a sculptor.
It was as a sculptor that he shared these words: “I saw an angel in the marble and carved until I set him free.”
There is an angel in each of you.  You might not see it today, but it’s there.
The degree you’ve earned is your chisel, giving you the tools you need to help build the life you want to live.
You all have something that makes you come alive.  That’s your angel in the marble.  Find it – and carve and carve – until you set it free.
So today, reflect on how far you’ve come.  And give thanks for the strength and resilience of this amazing community.  And, then tonight, celebrate your hard-earned achievement with your friends and family. 
 
You have a whole world in front of you, and the determination to take you anywhere you want to go.
On behalf of President Obama, the First Lady and the Vice President, my husband Joe – we are proud of you.  We look forward to all that is to come – congratulations!
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 10, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Congressional Spouses Service Project
Naval Observatory
Washington, D.C.
3:17 P.M. EDT

DR. BIDEN:  Hello, everyone, and welcome to our home.  It is wonderful for you to all be here today on such a beautiful day, especially after the rain all this week.
One of the best parts of my role as Second Lady has been visiting with military families all across the country and throughout the world.  I’m always amazed by their courage, their resilience and their strength.
As you all know, the First Lady and I started Joining Forces last year as a way to honor, recognize and support our veterans and military families.  We’ve been so inspired by the many ways Americans all across this country have stepped up to show their support.
Full Circle Home is a wonderful organization started by Vicki Durfree that supports women and military families.  Vicki’s son, Gil, is a Marine.  Working with Vicki is Lisa Miller, an Army mom herself. 
When Vicki’s son was deployed, he asked him mom to help him send a gift to his girlfriend at Christmas.  That was the beginning.  Around the holidays and for Mother’s Day, Full Circle Home arranges for gift boxes to be sent on behalf of service members to their loved ones.
The boxes are filled with pampering products, and, most importantly, a handwritten note from their deployed loved one.  My son, Beau, is a major in the Delaware Army National Guard who was deployed for a year to Iraq, so I know what it feels like for a mom to see that familiar handwriting from a son or a daughter thousands of miles away.  What an incredible surprise for a mom or a spouse to receive. 
More than 4,000 gift boxes have been sent to women across the United States, and even to bases in Iraq and Afghanistan in the past five years. 
Vicki and Lisa, thank you for all you are doing to support our military families.  (Applause.)
Thank you to everyone here for taking the time to help with this service project.  Your time will help thousands of military moms and wives know their loved ones are thinking of them this Mother’s Day.
Now, it is my pleasure to introduce someone who has helped make today possible.  Sloan Gibson, President of the USO, is one of our strongest advocates for our servicemen and women and their families.
Sloan.  (Applause.)

* * * * *

DR. BIDEN:  And now, I want to introduce our First Lady, Michelle Obama, who has been just a wonderful, caring friend, partner and advocate for our U.S. military.
Michelle.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, good afternoon, everyone.  I’m not going to talk long because we’re going to get to work, as you all already have been.
I want to start by thanking Jill for opening up this beautiful home for us today.  I want to thank Sloan and the USO for everything they’ve done.  They have just been a phenomenal partner. 
And of course to Vicki and to Lisa, and everything they’re doing with Full Circle Home.  This is just the kind of partnership, just the kind of opportunities that people have in this country to give back and to be creative with the skills that they have, the ideas that they have, what impact that that can have.
But most importantly, I want to just thank all of the congressional spouses, all of the men and women who have taken time out of their busy days to be here.  It was wonderful spending time with you all yesterday at the luncheon.  Great job to the committee.  Well done.  We had a lot of fun, as we always do.  That luncheon is a very special opportunity for us to get together. 
But as I said yesterday, these kind of service opportunities make that luncheon even more special, because it is really the time that we can come together as a group and give back to the community and the country that we all love in ways that you all are doing every day in your own community.
So I am just grateful for you all taking this time out.  It means a lot to both Jill and to I, and of course to all of the military wives and mothers out there who are going to benefit from the gifts that we pack.  I will echo Sloan and Jill in saying -- I am not, have not been a military mom or a wife, but I can only imagine the challenge that this time brings for people with loved ones deployed.  And as Jill said, just getting that note, that familiar handwriting, just making sure that these women know that they’re not forgotten on a day that is so special to all of us. 
So with every package you pack, you’re just brightening up the lives of women who are doing the most, and some making the greatest sacrifice that you can make for this country.  But you all are doing the same thing in your roles as spouses.
We all know that in these roles we are sacrificing as well.  No matter what party we’re in, our husbands and wives are doing the very best for this country, looking out for it each and every day.  And with that, many of us, our families are sacrificing and giving and serving right alongside them as well.  And I know that you all are in a unique position to understand what military -- many military families are going through.  And many of you all are Blue Star families as well, so I know that this makes it even more special.
So I just want to thank you all again.  And with that, we should just get to work.  We’ve got 2,000 packages to get together, so let’s make it happen.  Thank you all.  (Applause.)
END 
3:25 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 10, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden at Mother's Day Tea
East Room
2:07 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Good afternoon, everyone.  And thank you all for being here.  It’s great to have you at the White House.  I want to thank my great friend and partner, First Lady Michelle Obama, who has done so much for military families.  Thank you, Michelle.  (Applause.)
Many of you know that I’m a proud military mom and grandmother, and I’m always honored to be in the presence of military families.  My son, Beau, is a major in the Delaware National Army Guard, and when he deployed to Iraq it was a tough year for our family.
I know many of you in this room have faced similar challenges.  Grandparents, moms and dads worry through deployments.  Kids miss their parents.  Throughout their service, children have to change schools, make new friends, join new sports teams.  It can really be hard.  I want all of you to know just how much we appreciate everything your families do in serving our country.
That’s why Michelle and I started our Joining Forces initiative to give something back to all of our nation’s military families.  We’re working with Americans all across the country in every sector of society to find new ways to show our support.  And Mother’s Day gives us a special opportunity to say thanks to the mothers who have shaped and supported us. 
Now it is my great pleasure to introduce a military spouse and mom, Jennifer Pilcher.  Jennifer’s husband, Eddie, is a pilot in the Navy who has been assigned to six different duty stations in the past 12 years.  With each reassignment, Jennifer has packed up their home, their two children, and started over in a new community, all while enduring Eddie’s multiple deployments.
On top of all that, Jennifer recently co-founded militaryoneclick.com, a website that connects military families with important resources.  You’ve been busy.  (Laughter.)  Jennifer, thank you for being here today, and thank you for your service.  Happy Mother’s Day.  (Applause.)
* * * * *
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to the White House.  It is a beautiful day.  And I hope you all like your Mother’s Day surprises because they worked really hard on them in there.  Very focused, very diligent, very creative.  And if you want to know what the black stuff on their mouths are, they had a few of the cookies -- couldn’t help it.  (Laughter.)
Well, let me start by thanking Jennifer for that very kind introduction and for everything that you and your team do for your family, for your community, and more importantly, for our entire country.
I also have to thank my partner in crime, Jill.  She has been just a amazing friend and a role model for me of what it means to be a strong military mom.  She is terrific and we have to give her a round of applause.  (Applause.)
And it wouldn’t be a Mother’s Day tea if I didn’t thank my own mommy.  Mommy -- there you are, who is here today.  (Applause.)  And it’s a big deal when grandma does anything.  (Laughter.)  So the fact that she’s sitting in that chair is a big testimony to her respect and admiration for all of you.
But I have said it before and I will say it again -- I would not be standing here if it weren’t for her.  My mom is my rock, as many of you all know, and as many of these young people will understand what being a mom is.  She is my rock.  She has taught me to believe in myself, and more importantly, to pick myself up whenever I stumble.
She is always a shoulder to cry on and talk to, and I do that a lot.  And she has always inspired me -- something I think is amazing for my mom -- to push myself to dream even bigger than anything she could ever dream for herself, and she has always done that.  And it’s true today. 
So for me, when I think of Mother’s Day, I think of my own mom.  And this day wouldn’t be the same for me without her here.  So when we were planning this event today to honor our nation’s mothers, we wanted to make sure that all of you could bring along those special people in your own lives, as well.  And we’re thrilled to have a really wonderful group of moms and grandmas and sons and daughters who are here with us today at the White House.
As Jill and Jennifer pointed out, we have got military mothers here.  And some of you are in our country’s uniform, as you can see.  Some of you are married to someone who does wear a uniform.  But all of you are outstanding role models for your children, for your communities and for this country.
For all of you -- and I say this a lot -- service isn’t just something that you do once in a while or during the holidays, it’s how you live your lives.  Whenever there’s something going on in the community -- an opening on the PTA, or they need a leader to drive for the local car pool, or someone asks for volunteers, and then you’ve got that uncomfortable silence in the room -- (laughter) -- we all have been there.  You all are the first ones to speak up and say, how can I help?  No matter how busy you are with your own lives, you’re always filling in those gaps for your families and for the broader community.  So let’s give a big round of applause to all of our military moms here today.  (Applause.)
And another -- here’s to the grandmas here today.  I want to say a special thank you to all of our grandmas here.  Obviously, you all are mothers too, or else you wouldn’t be grandmothers.  (Laughter.)  That would be one of those obvious points that Malia would say, duh.  (Laughter.)  So, Sarah, my speechwriter -- duh.  (Laughter.)  And I can't begin to imagine what it must feel like to have your baby be far away from home and in harm’s way.
But your sons and daughters, their choice to serve this country is really a reflection of your love.  It is.  It’s a reflection of your strength and all the good decisions that you made in raising them.  That we know.  And I know that when a mom or dad is deployed, it often means that all of you grandparents, you're stepping up to help take care of your grandchildren -- you’re the first phone call when mom or dad gets tied up at work, and you’re often spending long weekends away from your own homes, filling in wherever needed.  I know that's the case in our household.
But no matter what, you all are always, always there.  And that is not just important for us as parents, but for the connection that you make with the next generation.  It is so powerful.  For that, this whole country is grateful.  And that also means that you all are -- have earned the right to spoil your grandchildren as much as you want, which happens in my house.  (Laughter.)  What happens to the grandmothers, you know?  You turn into just pieces of mush.  (Laughter.)
Yes, I tell my children to eat my vegetables, and Grandma is like, why.  (Laughter.)  Why can't they have whatever they want?  (Laughter.)  And I’m like, these were the rules you -- these were your rules.  (Laughter.)  Don't you remember?  No, no, I don't remember ever making you eat vegetables.  Ever.  (Laughter.)  How many people have grandmas like that?  (Laughter.)  So, to all the grandmas, thank you.  We love you.  (Applause.)
And to all of our kids -- (applause) -- our kids.  All of this, this day, all we do is for you.  All of this, it’s for you.  Not for us.  We don't care.  We don't matter.  It’s for you.  (Laughter.)  And you’re so cute, and you look so good.  (Laughter.) 
I want you all to know just how special you all are -- really -- each and every one of you.  And for all the kids out there, the military kids out there who will see this, you all are so special.  And I know it isn’t easy when mom or dad is away for so long.  I know it’s tough to have to be so grown up sometimes and pick up and move across the country and try to make new friends again, and again, and again.  I can't imagine how tough that must be.
But I want you all to know that what you do every day, all the good things you do, the way you handle your business -- as I tell my kids -- picking up extra chores when mom or dad is gone; taking care of your brothers and your sisters -- because we know you love them even if you act like you don't.  (Laughter.)  We know this.  Staying on top of your schoolwork, just being good people -- all of that makes you all heroes for this country too. 
So today, we are here to celebrate all of you.  Yay for our children.  (Applause.)  Keep up the good work.  And no matter what Grandma says, eat your vegetables.  (Laughter.)  Eat your vegetables.
So tomorrow is Military Spouse Appreciation Day.  May is National Military Appreciation Month, and we’re just a couple of days away from Mother’s Day.  So now is really the perfect time to thank all of you for your service to this country.  Every single day, you all are an inspiration to Jill and to me.  Whenever we think we’re tired, we just remember your stories and it gets us up.  You all are an inspiration to our husbands, more importantly, and you all are an inspiration to the entire country.  And today I think you deserve to celebrate. 
And with that, I think Jill and I are going to come down there and we’re going to take some pictures with all of you.  We’re going to go table to table and say hello to every one of you.  You all, happy Mother’s Day.  Enjoy this day and all those to come.
Thank you.
END
2:23 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 26, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on Foreign Policy at a Camapaign Event
New York University, Tishman Auditorium
New York, New York
10:59 A.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, folks.  How are you?  It’s great to be with you all.  (Applause.)  What a great introduction.  I just said I hope she remembers me when she’s President of the United States of America.  (Laughter.)
Ladies and gentlemen, it’s great to be before such a distinguished audience at a great university.  I want to start off by doing what the Ambassador will tell you you should never do, apologizing.  It’s all Jack Lew’s fault I’m late.  (Laughter.)  No, some of you students don't know that the President’s Chief of Staff was the CFO here at NYU, and also taught a public policy course, and so that's the only reason he got the job as Chief of Staff.  (Applause.)  He figured if he could deal with this great university, he can deal with the country.
And it’s great to see one of the great, great patriots, one of the finest generals I’ve ever in my 39 years of working in foreign policy and national security ever met, General Wesley Clark.  Great to see you, General.  (Applause.)
I want to just state parenthetically that you know I ran -- not you know, but I ran for the United States Senate when I was 28 years old, and no one in my family on my dad’s side had ever been involved in public life.  And as one of my colleagues said, I’m the first United States Senator I ever knew.
And I ran at the time because I thought the policy we had in Vietnam, I didn't argue it as immoral, but I thought it just didn't make sense, the notion of dominoes and so on and so forth.
And I came to Washington as a 29-year-old kid.  I got elected.  Before I was eligible to serve, I had to literally wait to be sworn in because I wasn’t eligible under the Constitution.  You must be 30 years old.  And my image of the military commanders at the time was, if you ever saw that old movie, if you ever rented it, where Slim Pickens is on the back of an atom bomb, dropping out of an aircraft, yelling, Yippe, Kiyay.  (Laughter.)  And “Dr. Strangelove” was the movie.
But I have to tell you after all the time I’ve served in public office, if you asked me who the most impressive women and men that I have met in government in the last 40 years, six of them would be men or women wearing a uniform.  It’s a different military.  This guy was not only a great warrior -- I mean literally a warrior, but this guy is a diplomat.  This guy is an incredibly bright man, extremely well educated.  He understands the role of the military within our system, and he understands the Constitution.
And there are -- Thank God, there’s others like him that are still around today.  Wes, thanks for being one of those many folks who changed my impression from my younger years.  It’s a pleasure to be with you.  (Applause.)
Folks, over the last -- the past months, I’ve given on behalf of the campaign a series of speeches on major issues in this campaign laying down the markers, at least from our perspective, of the President and mine, the distinguishing differences between the President [sic] and us on a series of issues -- issues that we believe affect the middle class and our country’s future. 
I’ve spoken about the rescue of the American automobile industry in Toledo, Ohio.  I’ve spoken about retirement security down in Florida, about leading the world again in manufacturing in the Quad Cities area, and about the tax system and the unfairness of it and how to make fair up in New Hampshire.
Today, I will -- this is the fifth in the series of those speeches, and I want to talk about an American President’s single most important responsibility -- single most important responsibility -- and that's keeping our fellow citizens safe and our nation secure, particularly at a time of such extraordinary challenge and change.  The poet William Butler Yeats writing about his Ireland in the year 1916 in a poem called Easter Sunday 1916, said, “all’s changed, changed utterly; a terrible beauty has been born.”
The world has utterly changed during your young life and your early adulthood.  It’s not the world it was in 1990 and -- even as recently as 1990.  And the question is:  How are we going to deal with this beautiful -- this beautiful -- change that also has with its -- fraught with so many potential difficulties.
On this fundamental issue, foreign policy, keeping America safe, the contrast between President Obama, his record, and Governor Romney, and his rhetoric, in my view cannot be greater.
Three and a half years ago, when President Obama and I took office, and stepped into that Oval Office, our nation had been engaged in two wars for the better part of a decade.  Al Qaeda was resurgent and Osama bin Laden was at large.  Our alliances were dangerously frayed.  And our economy -– the foundation of our national security -– was on the precipice of a new depression.
President Obama began to act immediately.  He set in motion a policy to end the war in Iraq responsibly.  He set a clear strategy and an end date for the war in Afghanistan, which has been going on for close to a decade.  He cut in half the number of Americans who are literally serving in harm’s way.  He decimated al Qaeda’s senior leadership.  He repaired our alliances and restored America’s standing in the world and he saved our economy.  He saved our economy from collapse with some very unpopular but bold decisions that have turned out to be right, including the rescue of the automobile industry, all of which has made us much stronger not only at home but abroad.
If you’re looking for a bumper sticker to sum up how President Obama has handled what we inherited, it’s pretty simple:  Osama bin Laden is dead and General Motors is alive.  (Applause.)
Governor Romney’s national security policies, in our view, would return us to a past we’ve worked so hard to move beyond.  And, in this regard, there is no difference in what Governor Romney says and what he has proposed for our economy than he has done in foreign policy.  In every instance, in our view, he takes us back to the failed policies that got us into the mess that President Obama has dug us out of, and the mess that got us into this in the first place.
Governor Romney, I think, is counting on collective amnesia of the American people.  Americans know -- American know that we can’t go back to the future, back to a foreign policy that would have America go it alone -- shout to the world you’re either with us or against us, lash out first and ask the hard questions later, if they get asked at all, isolate America instead of isolating our enemies, waste hundreds of billions of dollars and risk thousands of Americans’ lives on a war that’s unnecessary -- and see the world through a Cold War prism that is totally out of touch with the realities of the 21st century. 
On this and everything else, President Obama, in my view, has demonstrated that he is totally in touch with our times.  He has acted boldly, strengthening America’s ability to contend with the new forces shaping this century and to attend to the challenges and opportunities around the world that have been neglected over the past -- or previous past eight years.
Under President Obama’s leadership, our alliances have never been stronger.  He returned Europe to its rightful place as a partner of first resort in dealing with global threats, while at the same time reclaiming America’s place in Asia as an Asian Pacific power -- a region where U.S. exports are producing new jobs and driving our economic recovery.  We’ve forged a new relationship based on mutual interest with emerging powers like China, Russia, Brazil, Turkey, South Africa -- all of which are helping advance American security.  
We reduced our reliance on nuclear weapons, achieved major arms control agreements with Russia, and brought the world together to secure nuclear materials from getting into the hands of terrorists.  We’ve isolated countries like Iran and North Korea whose nuclear programs threaten peace and stability.  And we’ve taken far more terrorists off the battlefield in the last three years than in the previous eight, putting al Qaeda on a path to defeat. 
At the same time, the President shut down secret prisons overseas, banned torture, and in doing so demonstrated that we don’t have to choose between protecting our country and living our values; and, as a consequence of those decisions, enhanced the security of our own soldiers abroad and the power of our persuasion around the world.
We plan for conflicts in the future with a new defense strategy, supported by the entire Defense Department’s senior leadership.  Our military will be more agile, flexible, better able to confront aggressors and project power, with strong partnerships to share the burden and smart investments in cutting edge capabilities.
We proposed a budget that will fund this strategy and keep faith with our wounded warriors, our veterans and their families.
We led the fight to free Libya and the Libyan people from Qaddafi, using our unique military assets to clear the way for our allies, who stepped up -- stepped up -- to meet their own responsibility.  And the result was something that the General and others before him sought time and time again but rarely achieved:  genuine burden sharing and an end to the Qaddafi regime that had murdered so many, including hundreds of its fellow citizens.
Now, we’re ratcheting up the pressure on other brutalizers, people who brutalize their citizens, like Bashar al-Assad in Syria, while engaging the forces for change in the Arab Spring and putting America firmly on the side of freedom around the world.
We made the G20 a new forum for international economic coordination, recognizing again the realities of the 21st century.  We opened new markets around the world for American businesses.  And we’ve refocused our development policy on building the capacity of other nations on major global health and food security initiatives and steadily, steadily combating climate change.
That’s the essence of our record.  The question is, where does Governor Romney stand?  How would he keep our citizens safe and our nation secure?  In the face of the challenges we now understand are ahead of us, what would Governor Romney do?
Well, the truth is we don't know for certain, but we know where the Governor starts.  He starts with a profound -- a profound -- misunderstanding of the responsibilities of a President and the Commander-in-Chief.
Here’s what he said, and I want to quote him exactly.  And I quote:  “If we want someone who has a lot of experience in foreign policy, we can simply go to the State Department.”  He went on to say, and I quote, “But that’s not how we choose a President.  A President is not a foreign policy expert.”
In my view, the last thing we need is a President who believes that he can subcontract our foreign policy to experts at the State Department, or for that matter, any other department or agency.  Because here how it works -- I’ve been around for eight Presidents of the United States.  I hate to admit.  (Laughter.) I know I don't look that old, right?  (Laughter.)  But eight Presidents.  That's not how it works.
President Obama has built a great national security team, from Secretary of State Clinton, to CIA Director Petraeus, to Defense Secretary Leon Panetta, to the Chairman of Joint Chiefs,  Dempsey.  President Bush put together his own team of experts.   But the bottom line is this: no matter how experienced the team, no matter how wise the advice and counsel, to use that old expression, the buck literally stops on the President’s desk in the Oval Office.
One of the toughest -- only the toughest decisions land on that desk.  And as often as not, his advisors are in disagreement -- disagreements among themselves -- all smart people, but they disagree -- seldom completely unified.
As I know the General has heard me say before, I cannot think of any consequential decision in the eight Presidents I’ve served with where the President had more than 75 percent of the facts.  It never works that way.  Almost every significant case, it calls for a final judgment call to be made by the President, a call that the Vice President can’t make, the Secretary of State can’t make, the Secretary of Defense can’t make -- only the President can make.
I know from experience.  I literally get to be the last guy in the room with the President.  That’s our arrangement.  I can give him all the advice that I have and make my case, but I walk out of the room.  He sits there by himself, the President sits there by himself and has to make the decision, often -- often -- reconciling conflicting judgments that are made by very smart, honorable, informed, experienced people.
And the President is all alone at that moment.  It’s his judgment that will determine the destiny of this country.  He must make the hard calls.  I’d respectfully suggest President Obama has made those hard calls with strength and steadiness.
And the reason he has been able to is because he had clear goals and a clear strategy how to achieve those goals.  He had a clear vision and has a clear vision for America’s place in the world.  He seeks all the help he can get from experts as to how to realize that vision, but ultimately he makes the decision.
So it seems to me, Governor Romney’s fundamental thinking about the role of the President in foreign policy is fundamentally wrong.  That may work -- that may work -- that kind of thinking may work for a CEO.  But I assure you, it will not and cannot work for a President and it will not work for a Commander-in-Chief.
Thus far, Governor Romney has not made many foreign policy-focused decisions or pronouncements.  Foreign policy has not been a focus of his campaign.  Now, if you’ll excuse me a point of personal privilege, given President Obama’s record  -- the strongest foreign policy in decades -- I can understand why the President -- why Governor Romney doesn’t want to make it a focus of his campaign.  But it is, these are, critical issues.
So how do we fairly assess the views of Governor Romney on foreign policy?  What are they?  I think a fair way to do this -- and obviously others may disagree with whether or not I’m being as objective as possible, I think the fair way to do this is look at the few things that we do know about Governor Romney.
We know Governor Romney reflexively criticizes the President’s policy and almost in every case without offering any specific alternative.  We know that when the Governor goes -- does venture a position, it’s a safe bet that he previously took or is about to take an exactly opposite position -- (laughter) -- and an equally safe bet that he is going to end up landing in the wrong place and out of the mainstream of the thinking of Republican and Democratic foreign policy experts.
We know that when he agrees with the President of the United States, as he has done, he then goes on to mischaracterize our record to create what is a non-existent contrast.  And most importantly, we know that the extent that Governor Romney -- to the extent he has shown any foreign policy vision, it’s through the glass of a rear-view mirror. 
Look, in my view, he would take us back to a dangerous and discredited policies that would make Americans less safe and America less secure.  And the best way to try to make the points I believe are honest to make is to illustrate these propositions, is to compare President Obama’s record and Governor Romney’s rhetoric on major foreign policy and the national security interests of our day.
Let’s start with Iraq.  When President Obama ran four years ago, he promised to end the war responsibly.  He gave me the honor and the responsibility of coordinating that policy.  He kept this commitment.  He brought home -- it was already mentioned -- all 150,000 of our troops and developed a strong relationship with a sovereign Iraq. 
Last December, Governor Romney initially applauded the withdrawal, which he went on to say -- partially, which is true -- he went on to say the credit should go to President Bush, but he applauded the decision.  Three months later, he reversed him, saying, and I quote, it was an “enormous error” -- I can back this up -- and saying that he would have left tens of thousands of U.S. troops behind in Iraq. 
In Afghanistan, President Obama developed a clear strategy to end the war in 2014, while building the capacity of the Afghan government, its security forces and its people.  Setting a withdrawal date was the best way to get the Afghans to step up and take responsibility for their own country.  Without it, we know from Iraq, it doesn’t happen.  If we’re doing it all, why step up?  So we know unless you set a date, the likelihood of stepping up and taking on the responsibility is unlikely to occur.
Folks, as I’ve said in many circumstances, we cannot want peace and security in Afghanistan more than the Afghans want it.  Our NATO partners, the International Security Assistance Force -- of some 50 countries -- embraced the President’s strategy.  And so did Governor Romney embrace the President’s strategy -- at least at first.  He endorsed the President’s plan to transition to Afghanistan responsibility and withdraw our combat troops in 2014.  Here’s what he said, and I quote, “that’s the right timeline.”
But two months later, he was against the President’s plan, calling it and I quote, “one of the biggest mistakes.”  And now, and I want to be completely straight about this, he seems -- I emphasize seems -- seems to want to keep American forces in Afghanistan indefinitely.  Here again I want to quote him.  And I quote, “it’s my desire and my political party’s desire not to leave.”  I’m not sure the exact context.  I’m not sure exactly what he meant.  But I am sure he is going to have a responsibility to explain to the American people what he meant by that.  He may have a reasonable explanation.  But the American people deserve an explanation. 
Where Governor Romney has expressed a clear and consistent point of view, he has been clearly and consistently stuck in the past -- and, in my view and the President’s view, I might add, wrong.
When we came to office, President Obama reset our relationship with Russia.  To state the obvious, we had then and we have now important disagreements with Moscow.  And we’re going to continue to have disagreements with Moscow.  But in the wake of the reset -- as we called it, when I was asked to go over and make that first speech on behalf of the administration over at a conference called the Wehrkunde Conference.  In the wake of that reset, we’ve negotiated a major nuclear arms reduction treaty that has made us safer and sets an example, I might add, for the rest of the world for the possibility we can continue to reduce nuclear arms around the world. 
In addition, President Obama convinced Russia to cancel the sale of Russia’s very sophisticated S300 cutting edge, air defense radar system, to Iran.  Russia joined the United States -- hadn’t been until then -- joined the United States in the toughest ever sanctions against Iran, gave us permission to transit Russian territory and airspace with weapons and supplies for American troops in Afghanistan -- the only other source and now the sole source, hopefully, only temporarily.
But just a month ago, Governor Romney, called and here again I quote, “without question our number one geopolitical foe” is Russia.  (Laughter.)  As my brother would say, go figure.  (Laughter.)  And sometimes -- I don’t know whether it’s a slip of the tongue or it’s a mindset -- but he even refers to Russians as “Soviets” -- (laughter) -- which I think -- no, I think reveals a mindset.  Everybody sometimes slips -- I never do, but everybody sometimes slips.  (Laughter and applause.)
Look, I think it’s fair to say when it comes to Russia, based on only what we know he’s said so far, Governor Romney is mired in a Cold War mindset.  Similarly, the Governor aggressively attacked New START, the nuclear arms control treaty that President Obama negotiated with Moscow.  He attacked it.  That treaty reduces a number of strategic nuclear weapons in Russia’s arsenal and allows inspections of Russia’s nuclear arsenals to resume without placing any constraints on U.S. missile defense and our conventional strike capabilities.
Governor Romney was part of a very small group of Cold War holdovers who never met an arms control treaty that he likes.  He was way out of the mainstream in this issue, unless you think that’s just political hyperbole.  Let me tell you why.  Virtually the entire Republican foreign policy establishment disagreed with him, starting with Secretary Henry Kissinger, Secretary Colin Powell, Senator Richard Lugar -- the most informed person on foreign policy in the Senate, National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley, Secretary of State Jim Baker, Secretary of State George Schulz, National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft and President George H. W. Bush, all -- all support it and strongly support it and helped us get past through some recalcitrant Republican senators this critically important treaty.
Unfortunately, Governor Romney’s apparent determination to take U.S.-Russian relations back to the ‘50s also causes him to misstate the facts.  For example, he charged that -- as he calls it to appease Moscow -- to appease Moscow, “President Obama has been pliant on missile defense and abandoned our missile defense sites in Poland.”
Here again he is either woefully misinformed or totally misunderstands.  As it happens, President Obama asked me to secure allied support for a new and more effective missile defense system in Europe, the so-called Phased Adaptive Approach. 
So the first visit I made was to Poland.  And who did we ask to host these new components for this more sophisticated system?  That’s right, Poland, along with Turkey, Romania, Germany and Spain, who all said yes.  These countries and all of NATO embraced our new approach, because they understand it will protect them more quickly and more effectively than the missile defense program Romney wanted to stick with.
And I’d add parenthetically, it also provides better protection for the United States of America.  As then Secretary of Defense Bob Gates, who served in Republican and Democrat administrations, said, and I quote, “we are strengthening, not scrapping, missile defense in Europe.” 
But I think nothing speaks more powerfully to the differences between President Obama and Governor Romney than one of the defining moments in the past four years, the hunt for Osama bin Laden.  In 2008, while campaigning for the nomination, Governor Romney was asked what he would do about bin Laden.  Let me tell you exactly what he said, and I quote.  He said, “there would be very insignificant increase in safety,” then he went to say, “if Bin Laden was brought to justice.”  He then went on -- that's a quote.  He then went on to say, “it’s not worth moving heaven and Earth, spending billions of dollars just to catch one person.”
Here’s how candidate Obama answered that question.  He said, “if I have Osama bin Laden in our sights, I will take him out.  I will kill bin Laden.  We will crush al Qaeda.  This has to be our biggest national security priority.”
I was a little bit more direct.  I said, we’d follow the S.O.B. to the gates of Hell if we had to.  (Laughter and applause.)
But here’s the deal, President Obama always means what he says.  He said it as a candidate, and he kept that commitment.  Just a few months into office, sitting in the Oval Office, and I spend four to six hours a day with this President, that's why we’ve become such good friends, and I’ve gotten to know him so well, literally, and has -- made almost every meeting he has.  We were sitting in the meeting, and he turns to Leon who was -- Panetta, who was then the chairman of -- excuse me, the head of the CIA, Director of CIA and military personnel there, and he made it clear what his priority was.
And on June 2, 2009, he ordered Leon Panetta, gave the following written order, and I quote, “in order to ensure that we have expended every effort, I direct you to provide me within 30 days a detailed operational plan for locating and bringing to justice Osama bin Laden.”  It was the President’s highest priority for the CIA.
Then, he made one of the most courageous decisions I’ve seen a President make and I would argue in a long time.  He authorized a very, high risk mission to capture or kill Osama bin Laden, even though -- and I was one of six people who for four months or so were the only ones who knew about the possibility of his location -- even though at the end of the day, there was no better, as you know, General, than a 50/50 chance bin Laden was present in the compound.
But despite that reservation -- and I might add the reservations of almost every one of his -- the only full-throated support for moving when we did was from Leon Panetta, the Director of the CIA, myself included.
President Obama said afterwards when he made the decision:  “This was a very difficult decision.  It entailed enormous risk to the guys I sent there.  But ultimately I had so much confidence in the capacity of our guys to carry out the mission that I felt the risks were outweighed by the potential benefit to us of finally getting our man.”
And I might add parenthetically, does anybody doubt had the mission failed, it would have written -- the beginning of the end of the President’s term in office.  This guy has got a backbone like a ramrod.  No, no, for real.  (Laughter.)  For real.
On this gut issue, we know what President Obama did.  We can’t say for certain what Governor Romney would have done.  But we can say that, unlike Governor Romney, the American people believe, and I quote, “it was worth moving Heaven and Earth to get bin Laden.”
I said before thanks to President Obama, bin Laden is dead and General Motors is alive.  You have to ask yourself, if Governor Romney had been President, could he have used the same slogan –- in reverse?  People are going to make that judgment.  It’s a legitimate thing to speculate on.
Look, on a few core issues, there’s no real difference between President Obama and Governor Romney.  So in those cases, as I said at the outset, in my view, Governor misrepresents the President’s approach or suggests that the President is not doing things that in fact he is already doing.
Again, let me give you some examples.  Iran’s nuclear program is maybe the clearest example.  President Obama is determined to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon.  He has stated that no options are off the table, and he’s been clear and concise saying that containment is not our policy.
When he took office, the effort to pressure Iran was stuck in neutral, Iran’s influence -- and think about this, when he took office, Iran’s influence was spreading in the region.  And American leadership was in doubt.  I would argue we were not much respected by our friends, and not really feared by our enemies.
But President Obama understood that by seeking to engage Iran in the first interest, by going the extra diplomatic mile and presenting Iran a clear choice, we would demonstrate to the world that Iran, not the United States, was the problem.
The President’s smart, tough diplomacy turned the tables on Tehran and secured the strongest unilateral and international sanctions in history; all the major powers, including Russia and China, participating.
Now, Iran is more isolated and the international community more united in their effort to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon than ever before.  Tehran has deep difficulties acquiring equipment and technology for its nuclear and missile program.  It’s increasingly cut off from the international financial system, unable to do the most basic business transactions.
And its economy has been grievously wounded, and the worst is still to come.  In June, a European embargo on imports of oil from Iran kicks in.  Folks, look, as a result of this unprecedented pressure, Iran is back to the negotiating table.  You can't predict what the end result will be, but they're back to the table.
Governor Romney has called for what he calls for a “very different policy” on Iran.  But for the life of me, it’s hard to understand what the Governor means by a very different policy.  Here’s what he says.  He says we need “crippling sanctions” -- apparently unaware that through President Obama’s leadership, we have produced just that –- crippling sanctions.
He emphasizes the need for “a credible military option” and a “regular presence of aircraft carrier groups” in the region –- apparently ignorant of the fact that’s exactly what our policy is and what we’re doing.
The only step -- I think it’s fair to say -- the only step we could take that we aren’t already taking is to launch a war against Iran.  If that’s what Governor Romney means by a very different policy, he should tell the American people.  He should say so.  Otherwise, the Governor’s tough talk about military action is just that -- talk.  And I would add counterproductive talk.
Folks, loose talk about a war has incredible negative consequences in our efforts to end Iran’s nuclear quest.  And let me tell you why:  Because it unsettles world oil markets.  It drives up oil prices.  When oil prices go up, Iran’s coffers fill up, undermining the impact of the sanctions that are in existence.  This kind of Romney-talk is just not smart.
President Obama has said, and I quote, “now is the time to let our increased pressure sink in, and to sustain the broad international coalition we have built.  Now is the time to heed the timeless advice from Teddy Roosevelt: ‘speak softly and carry a big stick.’”  I promise you the President has a big stick.  (Laughter.)  I promise you.
President Obama understands what Governor Romney apparently doesn’t:  It is possible -– it’s indeed necessary -– for America to be strong and smart -- and smart -- at the same time.
Look, no country is more concerned about a nuclear Iran than Israel, and rightly so.  And no President since Harry Truman has done more for Israel’s security than Barack Obama.
Our administration provided record levels of security assistance.  We funded what’s referred to as the Iron Dome, a missile defense system that recently intercepted in those rockets coming out of Gaza, nearly 80 percent of the rockets fired from Gaza just a few weeks ago, saving homes, schools, hospitals and the men, women and children who inhabit them.
 
We’re collaborating right now and have been on longer range missile defense systems like Arrow and David’s Sling, and tying Israel into our early warning radar system.  The U.S. and Israel’s top political, defense, and security intelligence officers are engaged in the most consistent, comprehensive consultations ever.
  
You know this better than anybody, General.  Together we’re conducting the largest joint military operations in the history of the relationship.  And President Obama has stood up to what is I think the gravest threat to Israel, the effort of the rest of the world to delegitimize it as a state and I might add, often stood up alone -- alone -- in fighting the effort to delegitimize Israel at the United Nations and other international organizations -- single vetoes.
Israel’s leaders have called President Obama’s support for and cooperation with Israel “unprecedented.”  Governor Romney though, said relations between the United States and Israel had “hit a low” and went on to accuse President Obama of -- this is a good one -- “throwing Israel under the bus.”  That’s just one in a long litany of untruths about our administration’s policy toward Israel uttered by Governor Romney and repeatedly debunked by reporters, policy experts, fact checkers across the country -- and maybe most convincingly debunked by Israeli leaders.
Maybe the Governor is simply unaware or misinformed again.  Unfortunately, it’s more likely in my view the Governor is falling back on one of his party’s favorite tricks of late --  distort and mischaracterize your opponent’s position, keep repeating the distortions and mischaracterizations over and over again even when every objective observer says you’re wrong, keep repeating in the hope that it will eventually stick.
President Obama has reshaped American foreign policy to contend with the challenges of the present, but also to face the threats of the future.  And I believe he has done it with strength and wisdom.  Governor Romney wants to take us back to a world that no longer exists, with policies that are dangerously divorced from today’s realities.  Looking backwards is all the more misguided, because for all the peril of our times America’s promise has never, never, never been greater.
In the 20th century, the wealth of a nation was judged by the size of its population, the strength of its army, the abundance of its raw materials and the expanse of its landmass.  In the 21st century, these measures still matter and on that measure America still prevails.  But more than ever before -- you students know better than any of us -- more than ever before, the 21st century, the true wealth of a nation is to be found in its human resources, its people and their ability to imagine, to innovate, to build, to compete -- folks, by that measure, America is also uniquely blessed.
 
And the President and I believe our job -- our job -- in government is to help provide our people, all of our people, an environment in which they can fulfill the incredible potential our younger people have.
If we do our job, I believe our nation will be more secure, because America’s strength -- America's strength in the world depends ultimately on the strength of the American Dream here at home and in our economy.  That means investing in our students, our teachers, our schools, our university.  It means investing advanced research and development, attempting to catch up to the rest of the world in medicine, in science and the most modern airports, ports, bridges, roads -- all of which help increase the ability of American businesses to increase productivity and access to the world; to invest in clean, sustainable energy in cutting edge manufacturing.  No one is better positioned -- no one, no nation is better positioned than the United States in all those areas.
  
It also means welcoming people from around the world, which has always been the source of new blood and new brain power throughout American history.  It means rewarding hard work, demanding responsibility, insisting on accountability and creating opportunity for all our citizens.  These are the investments and the commitments that will grow our economy, create new jobs, keep America strong at home and allow us to continue to be the strongest nation in the world and the leader of the world.
 
And these investments and commitments, and the commitments that President Obama and I have made and will continue to make, I think, is what’s needed for America’s future.  As Vice President, on behalf of our nation, I have traveled well over a half a million miles since being sworn in as Vice President, many of them to far-flung countries all around the world.  And like many of you who have traveled, students and non-students here, we all have the same kind of feeling when you get home, the same just sort of intuitive feeling -- there is no country like America, there is no potential like America.
 
I was asked earlier how would I best define America.  I was with a group of high school students.  I said one word, possibilities -- possibilities.
I am absolutely convinced, I am more certain after having served 40 years in government than I was when I was the idealistic, young senator at age 29 -- I am more confident and convinced -- that there is no country, and we want all countries to do well, but there is no country better positioned to lead the world in the 21st century than the United States of America, but only if we stay the course we’re on, with the strong, smart leadership of President Obama looking forward and not in a rear-view mirror.
 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.  May God bless you all and may God protect our troops.
END
11:45 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  April 12, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on Tax Fairness at a Campaign Event
Exeter Town Hall
Exeter, New Hampshire
12:20 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, New Hampshire.  (Applause.)  Diedre -- I told Diedre, I should say amen and sit down.  (Laughter.)  And I told Diedre, we have something in common.  I drove a school bus too, when I was in law school to help pay my way, and now I’m kind of an administrative assistant, as well.  (Laughter and applause.)  And so we got a lot in common.
Look, it’s great to back in New Hampshire and to see -- I can't see a lot faces because of the lights, but back here I see a number of familiar faces, and up there I see a number of familiar faces, and it’s great to be back with you all.  (Applause.)
You know over the past few weeks, I’ve given a series of speeches on behalf of the President and myself about what’s at stake for the middle class and why the choice in this election is so fundamental.  I’ve spoken about the rescue of the automobile industry, the American automobile industry; about retirement security and having America lead the world again in manufacturing.  And today, I want to speak about a fourth topic that's going to impact significantly on -- with the other three -- on the state of the middle class in America, and that is the tax system.
All of these issues touch the most fundamental issue of all:  How do we rebuild an economy with a strong and growing middle class?  That's the challenge.  As the President says, that's the challenge of our time.
When all is said and done, this campaign we’re on is going to really boil down to a very simple question:  Are we going to rebuild an economy with a middle class that's growing and not shrinking?  And we are going to restore the value that says, in America if you work hard, you can get ahead, that personal responsibility will be rewarded, that everyone -- everyone -- from Main Street to Wall Street will play by the same rules?
We are as a country going to make I believe the responsible choice to ensure that that kind of future we want for our children is back within reach for our children.  Because you know the neighborhoods you grew up in, so many parents today of young children have doubt unlike we had raising our children that if they played by those rules, if they did it by the numbers, if they worked hard, they could be certain that they’d provide that opportunity for their children.  That's what this is really all about.
And part of the debate is about the tax system we have, and the subject that's on everyone’s mind as April 15th approaches.  President Obama and I believe that it’s simply wrong to have a system that’s so riddled with loopholes and preferences that the wealthiest and most successful of all Americans often pay at a lower rate -- at a lower rate of their taxes than average middle-class people do.
Warren Buffett who many people in America have come to know as an extremely successful, generous and gregarious man who shined a very, very bright light on this subject about -- when he noted the absurd fact that he, as a billionaire under the current tax laws, pays actually at a lower tax rate than his secretary pays.
But the thing is he’s not alone.  There are tens of thousands and several millions of people who are in that same situation that -- making over a million dollars do the same exact thing.  It happens all the time because the law allows it and because we are fortunate enough to -- they're fortunate enough to hire good accountants and lawyers who know who to take full advantage of every aspect of the tax code.
And so as we start, we have -- we decided how do we gain this -- how do we begin to get this back under control?  How do we being to right the ship here so middle-class people have an even chance? 
And to start, we started by proposing what we call the Buffett Rule to ensure that no one who makes a million dollars or more in any single given year will pay at an effective tax rate that's less than 30 percent.  It’s simply a matter of fairness.
But more than that, it’s also, I would argue, a matter of common sense.  Let me read you a quote, and this is a quote from someone else:  “Just a moment ago, I told some people about a letter I just received.  It’s a letter from a man out there in the country, an executive who’s earning six figures, well above a hundred thousand dollars a year.  He wrote me,” it goes on to say, in support of my -- “in support of the tax plan because he said, I am legally able to take advantage of the present tax code, nothing dishonest, doing what the law prescribes and wind up paying a smaller  tax than my secretary pays.  That letter wasn’t written to Warren Buffett.  That letter was written to and read by President Ronald Reagan.
The person went to say, “and I’d like to be able to come to Washington to be able to testify before the Congress to explain to them how I do that and why it’s wrong.”
Look, I remember -- I remember a time not too long ago when President Clinton was President of the United States, and when he left office, he left America with an enormous surplus and an enormous projected surplus.  I was proud to have been in the Senate at the time and helped him accomplish that goal.
But then Washington made a series of really bad choices after he left:  Two huge tax cuts, two huge tax cuts, neither of which were paid for, skewed overwhelmingly to the very wealthiest Americans of all; two wars -- two wars -- carried on the books, not a single penny paid for either one of those wars; and a [sic] Medicaid drug program worthy but also not paid for.  In addition, the Bush administration went on and eviscerated the oversight functions of the federal government, and as a consequence too many investors bet on short-term gains and made extremely risky financial schemes.  And you know the result, the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
So when Barack and I came to office, when we walked in the door at the peak of this crisis, we were handed a $1 trillion bill, deficit projection for that year, which started -- which started in September, the budget year, we were handed a $1 trillion bill before we were -- we had 10 minutes on the job, and the near certainty that we were going to lose several more million jobs before we even could get started with our program -- billions of dollars in lost revenues as a consequence of the Great Recession, coupled with the steps that had to be taken to prevent that recession from turning into a depression, which added more to the deficit.
And now -- now that we turn the corner, we’re faced with another choice:  Do we pay down those deficits, cutting wherever we can, as we’ve been doing, while at the same time investing in things we know we must invest in, in order for the economy to grow and create good, middle-class jobs?  We know what they are.  It’s invest in education, research and development, new technologies, clean energy.  Or do we continue to spend hundreds of billions of dollars on tax windfalls for millionaires, windfalls they don't need and I might ask, they never asked for it?
I come from a wealthy little state.  I often point out, wealthy people are just as patriotic as poor people.  They're just as patriotic as middle-class people, and I think they know -- I think they know they should be doing more.
And now Governor Romney and others argue that if we keep these windfalls and then shower even more windfalls on the very wealthiest, that's how America’s economy will grow.  That's how we will create jobs.  That's their thesis in a nutshell.  It amazes.  It absolutely amazes me.  He offers this prescription as if it’s somehow a new idea, folks, like something we haven’t seen before; even worse -- like something we haven’t actually tried before. 
Folks, we’ve seen this movie before.  You’ve seen the movie.  It does not end well.  It does not end well.  (Laughter.)   Where has he been?  (Applause.)  Where has he been?
Could it be that he’s out of touch?  (Laughter.)  I don't know, but I tell you what, he missed the movie.  (Laughter.)  Although he benefitted from the movie.
Folks, this is the same argument that was touted out a decade ago by President George Bush to justify the unjustifiable tax cuts for the very wealthy then.  And look what happened.  It actually had the opposite impact.  It produced the slowest job growth in half a century.  And during that period from 2000 to 2007, middle-income people actually lost $2,300 in income.  They actually retreated, did not grow.  But it is true that the very top did very, very, very well.  But the impact was our economy faltered, the middle class shrank, the poor got poorer, and ultimately the economy collapsed.
And on whom did it collapse?  It collapsed on all of you.  It collapsed on the middle class, and it came down with a crash -- $1.7 trillion in lost income -- lost value, the American people.  You watched the equities in your homes evaporate.  You watched your 401(k)s be eviscerated.  That's what it produced, and now Mitt Romney wants to take us down that same road again.
Let me state it plainly.  The President and I are determined to do all in our power to make sure we never go down that road again.  (Applause.)
Look, folks, it really is a simple, straightforward proposition.  There’s nothing very complicated about this.  We believe, as I suspect most of you do, Democrats and Republicans, we believe it’s fundamentally unfair to ask some middle-class families to pay more and to lose more opportunity so a millionaire can pay less.
Look, it’s that simple.  I don't know any person -- I don't know any reasonable person, regardless of their political background, who disagrees with that proposition.  Back when we were trying to put more teachers and cops back on the street, and we had a very small tax -- surtax on the first dollar over a million dollars, the polls showed the vast majority of millionaires thought it was the right thing to do.
So I don't buy this argument Republicans offer.  I don't buy this argument that the very wealthy aren’t prepared to contribute to the recovery in the same way that everybody else is prepared -- they're not prepared.  They're not prepared.
Ronald Reagan, Warren Buffett, Diedre, the President -- nobody that I know, no reasonable person, at least in my view thinks this is the American way.  In America, we’re not supposed to have a system that's rigged.  We’re not supposed to have a system with one set of rules for the very wealthy and one set of rules for everybody else.  And I might add if you notice, we’ve maintained our position that nobody under $250,000 would have their taxes raised, and where I come from, that's wealthy.
This is -- we’re talking about the very wealthy.  Ladies and gentlemen, time and again, time and again, middle-class Americans have shown their willingness to stand up and do their part in times of political, economic or military crisis -- time and again.  But the one thing the neighborhoods I come from and I suspect all of you, the one thing we don't like being played for is a sucker.  The one thing we don't like is being played for as a sucker.  (Applause.) 
So when you all pay your taxes next week, you and every citizen in New Hampshire and my home state of Delaware ought to be able to know that everyone one else is paying their fair share, as well.  But the truth is you know they're not.  The truth is when you pay those taxes you know not everyone is paying their fair share.
And, folks, it’s not just the Buffett Rule.  The Buffett Rule is not going to solve all problems.  It just brings a modicum of fairness at the outset here.  If Governor Romney has his way, we’ll have the Romney Rule.  And I mean it sincerely -- this isn’t a cute little deal.  There’s a Romney Rule.  The Romney Rule says, let’s double down on the tax cuts for the wealthy.
Look, folks, it’s not -- this is not about -- this not about class warfare; this is about math.  This is about math and people’s lives.  As my dad used to say, and I know the Congressman has heard me say this many times, don't tell me what you value, show me your budget, and I will tell you what you value.  Show me your budget and I will tell you what you value.  (Laughter and applause.) 
So let’s take a look.  Let’s take a look.  Let’s take a look what the Romney Rule values, what the Governor values, and his colleagues.  He values Bush tax cuts to be made permanent for the wealthy.  The ones that are intended to expire this December, he wants to extend them permanently.  That will cost $1 trillion over the next 10 years; $800 billion of that trillion going to people who make a minimum of $1 million.  And to add insult to injury, the Romney Rule proposes to give another $250,000-a-year tax cut to the average millionaire, on top of maintaining the Bush tax cuts.
I know -- if you hadn’t watched all the debates, you’d probably think I’m making this up.  (Laughter.)  But seriously, that's what -- that's what he calls for, the Romney Rule calls for.  That's another trillion dollars in tax cuts over the next 10 years going to the top 1 percent of American taxpayers.
(Baby cries.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  I don't blame her for crying.  She’s going to -- (Laughter and applause.)  She is going to inherit it.   She’s going to pay for it.  That's one smart baby.  (Laughter and applause.)
Look, folks, let me say it again, the Bush tax cuts for the very wealthy, and the new proposal of a trillion dollars in additional tax cuts.  These are tax cuts that folks in that category, the vast majority, didn't ask for.  They didn't ask for them.  They don't need them to maintain their standard of living.  And by the way, I’m being serious about that.  The only time people really sacrifice is when they lose a tax break or a tax structure that forces them to change their standard of living.  That what changes people -- when you have to move out of your house and rent, instead of own; when you can't send your kid to college and you can only send them to trade school and so on and so forth.  But nobody in the category designed to benefit from these tax cuts is going to have to change one, single aspect of their standard of living.
It’s a stark choice we have to make, a choice between the Romney Rule that I think will take the country -- take the country in a direction that we don't want to go.  Look, the Buffett Rule says no one making more than a million dollars will pay a smaller share of their income taxes than middle-class families do.  And you’ll hear them come back and say, well, the effective tax rate for middle-class families is lower and so on, a lot of what that is said it true, but the bottom line is -- let me put it another way:  Anybody making a million dollars can't pay 30 percent in taxes?  That's lower than the prescribed tax rate for millionaires already -- not just for millionaires, for people making over $200,000.
The Romney Rule says that the very wealthy should keep every tax break and loophole they have and get additional new tax cuts every year that are worth more than what the average middle-class family makes in a year -- in an entire year!  And in the neighborhoods -- I asked them to look up what the average income in this area is -- that one -- new $250,000-a-year tax break would be roughly -- if the numbers we were given are right -- somewhere between two -- excuse me, four times greater than the average income of a family in this -- in “this neighborhood.”  It’s just not fair.
But beyond being not fair, it is literally bad economic policy.  It is bad economic policy.  I understand -- we understand rewarding risk.  We understand rewarding people who innovate.  We understand that.  We understand some cases that deserve a different tax treatment to get people to take risks to benefit us all.  But let me put this in perspective by giving you an illustration.  This summer -- and Diedre just indirectly referenced it -- this summer, the interest rate on student loans is supposed to double, is set to double.  We are pushing the Congress to try to hold it at what it is, 3.8 percent.  It’s going to double now -- unless we enact the President’s plan.
With the Romney Rule, we couldn’t afford to do anything like that.  You know what it would mean to middle-class families in New Hampshire with a couple of kids going to college, will see their interest rates double.  Just imagine if tomorrow, your interest rate on your car loan doubled, what it means out of your pocket.  Imagine tomorrow if the interest rate you’re paying on your mortgage doubled.  I think these guys don't come from the same place we come from.  That makes a difference.  It makes a difference in your standard of living.  It makes a difference in what you can do for your family.  It matters.
It’s all about the impact of the Romney Rule on the middle class or the Obama-Biden approach.  It’s about whether or not you're going to be able to afford to send your kids to college, whether or not you can live in a safe neighborhood because there’s adequate resources to have sufficient police protection and fire protection.  It’s about whether or not your mom can pick up all her prescription drugs and not leave two at the counter.
My mom was living with me.  I didn't even know she was doing it till I followed her to the drug store, literally, and watched my mom say to the druggist, no, Honey, that's okay.  I only need four of these.  It’s about whether or not working moms, as Diedre, can afford not just childcare, decent childcare -- decent childcare. 
Look, in our view the fair way to do this is also the right way to do this, the economically sound way to do this, and that's why the President and I have been talking about this and we’ll continue to talk about it for a while.
Let me tell you what we propose in addition to the Buffett Rule.  We laid out a plan to reduce the federal deficit by $4 trillion over the next decade, and people say, well, how do you do that?  Well, we do that by making some very painful cuts -- we already cut over a trillion dollars, painful cuts.
But we also get that $4 trillion by coming up with $1.5 trillion by ending unnecessary tax breaks for the very wealthy, so our children don't have to carry the burden.  That's how we get to $4 trillion.  You can't get there without cutting bone and marrow if you don't include the elimination of the tax breaks for the very wealthiest among us.
If we put the Buffett Rule in place, let the Bush tax cuts expire for the very wealthy, and reject Romney’s additional trillion dollar tax cut for the wealthy, America will be able to do the things we need to do to grow the economy.  And you all know -- everyone knows what they are.
We can't be the most competitive nation in the world when we rank 16th in the world in the percent of college graduates we have as a nation.  We have to invest in education.  It is self-evident.  But to do that, to do that, you have to say it’s more important to help educate hundreds of children or send hundreds of kids to college than to give one billionaire the Romney rule tax cuts because that it would equate to.  (Applause.)  One, just one.  (Applause.)
And you don’t even have to go to billionaire.  How many kids can we send to college for $250,000 a year, the tax break he wants to add for people making over a million?  Look, choices matter.  They have consequences.  The President and I will make that choice but Mitt Romney will make a different choice.
We believe we need to provide tax credits for cutting-edge manufacturing enterprises so Americans will be able to lead the world in the industries of the future, what you’re doing up here in New Hampshire -- providing good paying jobs for a growing middle class.  But to do that -- to do that, you have to say that creating jobs in America is more important than another tax break for millionaires and billionaires, or for that matter, a tax break that is going to go overseas.  (Applause.)
The American people know the choice the President and I have made, and we’re going to make sure they know the choice the Romney rule is making.  Look, Governor Romney and his friends just have a -- they’re good people, but they have a fundamentally different economic philosophy than we do.
It’s -- to put it bluntly, we think it’s out of step with basic American values.  Now, I’m not calling these guys un-American; they’re sound, patriotic Americans.  I don’t want to hear anybody play that game with me.  But it is out of step, at least with the American values, those middle-class values that most of us were raised with.  And Governor Romney calls the President out of touch, and anti-woman, by the way but I -- out of touch?  Hey, how many of you all have a Swiss bank account?  (Laughter and applause.)  No one?  And how many of you have somewhere between $20 and $100 million in your IRA? 
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Oh, I do.
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  All right.  I’ve got to meet you.  I’ve got to meet you.  (Applause.)  Out of touch?  He calls the President out of touch?  Look, folks, the President and I -- as I’ve said before -- we value investment and risk.  And risk should be rewarded and investment should be encouraged, but we also value work.  We also value the work of our hands and the work of our head.  We value the work of the American people because guess what -- when they work, everything is added in value, everything has a higher value. 
Look, this is the basic choice in the election.  The President and I are determined to make the economy work for everybody -- everybody.  Not just because it's fair -- literally, not just because it's fair.  That's reason enough.  But we believe, and history shows, when the middle class grows the wealthy get wealthier, the poor have a better shot, the economy is sound and the economy grows.  We believe in a fair shot and a fair shake.  Governor Romney and those who share his philosophy believe in no rules, no risk when you fail taking a risk, and no accountability. 
Folks, I want to state it very plainly -- the President and I have absolute confidence in the American people.  That's not hyperbole.  We have absolute confidence in the American people.  They have been and continue to be the most innovative and productive people on the planet.  That is a fact.  We have absolute faith because we know, given the opportunity, they have never, never, never, never failed to step up -- never.
And we also know one other thing:  We are better positioned as a nation -- and you should know we are better positioned as a nation, counting every nation -- China, every other nation in the world -- we are better positioned as a nation at this moment to be the leading economy in the 21st century, if we act responsibly, if we invest in our people, if we invest in education, if we invest in innovation, if we invest in new technologies, if we invest in alternative energy.  We have absolute confidence.
And one other thing, that although we have a long way to go, we are on the right track.  Twenty-five months of growth -- not enough, but we are on the right track.  And let me make it clear to you, and I want to say it as plainly as I can, this is no time to turn back. 
God bless you all, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you all so very much.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
12:47 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 11, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at a Joining Forces Nurses Event
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
2:52 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Dr. Meleis, for that kind introduction.  I can see you're a great educator.
It's great to be here in Philadelphia to mark the one-year Joining Forces anniversary.  Many of you know that I'm a proud military mom.  One of the best parts of my role as Second Lady is spending time with so many veterans and military families.  And I've traveled around the country and the world, and I'm always inspired by the strength and resilience of military families. 
Our military families have done so much for our country, and each of us can do something in return.  That’s why the First Lady and I started Joining Forces last year -- so that every American can take action to honor and support our military families.  The federal government is doing its part.  And as we've seen all across the country this past year, companies, stores, churches, schools, individuals are all stepping up to support military families. 
We have asked a lot of our service men and women since September 11, 2001.  They and their families have responded to the need for more frequent and longer deployments.  As they have done in the past, these troops and their families have stepped up with no complaint. 
We know that some of our returning veterans and wounded warriors face significant challenges when they come home.  We have seen a growing number of veterans returning with post-traumatic stress and traumatic brain injury.  Making sure that they get the care they need is a priority for this administration and for Joining Forces.  That’s why I'm so pleased to be here today for this announcement.
Nurses represent America's largest health care workforce.  Many of you know that I'm a community college professor, and I've had the great privilege over the years of teaching countless nursing students -- and I have to tell you, they're always my A students.  I know just how dedicated nurses are to their profession. 
Nurses are on the front lines in providing life-saving care in nearly every community.  And this is critical, because only half of our veterans seek care through the VA system.  Nurses are vital to ensuring that all our veterans receive the care they need and deserve.  More than 500 nursing schools, and more than 150 nursing organizations are joining forces to make sure our nurses are prepared to meet the unique health needs of servicemembers, veterans and their families.
The leading nursing schools and nursing organizations have committed to educate current and future nurses on how to recognize and treat post-traumatic stress, traumatic brain injury, depression and other combat-related issues.  This Joining Forces commitment means there will be more than 3 million nurses ready to meet the needs of our brave men and women.  This is absolutely essential to ensuring our returning servicemembers and their families receive the care they deserve.  Thank you, for this tremendous effort. 
Our military families deserve the very best efforts of each of us, to ease the burdens created by their service to our country.  It is our sacred obligation to show our military families that we truly appreciate their sacrifices on our behalf. 
Before I close, I want to give a special thank you to my good friend and partner in this effort, First Lady Michelle Obama.  She is a committed, caring advocate who has done so much for our military families.  Thank you, Michelle.  (Applause.)
And now, I am so pleased to introduce Lieutenant Commander Pamela Wall -- a nurse who understands firsthand the kind of wounds we are talking about today.  She joined the U.S. Navy Corps in 1996 as a nurse, and has served at military medical facilities around the world.  as a pre-doctoral student at the University of Pennsylvania, her research is focused on traumatic brain injury.  Thank you, Pamela, for your service. 
And now, please join me in welcoming Lieutenant Commander Wall.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
* * * * * 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you all so much.  (Applause.)  Thank you. 
AUDIENCE MEMBERS:  We love you, Michelle!  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  You all, thank you so much.  That’s very sweet, very sweet. 
Well, I can’t tell you what a pleasure it is to be here with all of you today, and to feel this enthusiasm.  This is good stuff.  (Laughter.) 
I want to start by thanking Dr. Meleis for her very kind introduction.  And I'd like to thank both her and Lieutenant Commander Wall for their outstanding leadership at this university, and for the work that they're doing on this effort.  And of course, I have to recognize my partner and dear friend, Dr. Jill Biden.  I mean, she has just been a tireless advocate for our men and women in uniform.  (Applause.)  She has been a tremendous partner for Joining Forces, and a tremendous voice.  And I am grateful to have her as a partner and as a friend.
I also want to recognize Mrs. Lisa Nutter, who is here -- was here representing both herself and her husband.  She had to run -- her husband Mayor Nutter.  Assume you'd know that.  But I was happy she was able to attend, and just want to acknowledge her today.
And I also know that my friend, Patrick Murphy, your former congressman and a veteran himself -- (applause) -- as well as a champion for veterans and military families -- he is here.  And I want to thank Patrick for being with us today. 
And most of all, I want to thank all of the nurses and all of the nursing students who are here with us today.  (Applause.)  Yes, absolutely.  Because whether we're in a hospital or a doctor's office or community health center, nurses are often the first people we see when we walk through that door.  And we often spend much more time with nurses than just about any other health professional.  And I have seen this again and again in my own life experiences -- especially as a mother. 
Now, I have been fortunate enough to have some terrific doctors, and I am grateful for every last one of them, but when my daughters were born, it was the nurses who spent the most time with me and my husband.  They were the first ones to notice when something wasn't right, or when we needed a little extra time and attention.  And as my girls started to grow and I took them to all those well-baby exams and checkups -- it's a lot of them -- the nurses always took the time to answer all of my crazy, anxious questions, and to put my mind at ease.
So quite simply, nurses are the front line of America's health care system.  Every day, with your hard work, with your skill, your compassion, nurses determine the quality of care that we all receive.  So when Jill and I launched Joining Forces and we first started thinking about how to improve health care for our veterans and military families, it was very clear that we needed to call on all of you -- America's nurses and nursing students.  And it is clear from today's announcement that you all have answered the call in a tremendous way.  I mean, you all are mobilized and organized.
And because of your hard work, 3 million -- and that number, 3 million -- nurses -- (applause) -- will get the training that they need to better support our men and women in uniform and their families.
Now, when you think about it, it's not surprising that America's nurses came through in this way.  Because we all know that nurses get things done.  Ask any doctor.  They don’t know what they're doing, do they?  (Laughter.) 
We are all so thrilled to be announcing this commitment as we celebrate the one-year anniversary of Joining Forces.  This was excellent timing.  Because the fact is, your work is more critical for our veterans and military families than ever before.  As all of you know, and have heard from our speakers, that while the majority of our troops and veterans return home with few or no mental health challenges at all -- and that’s important to note -- many do experience the so-called "invisible wounds of war." 
Since 2000, more than 44,000 of our troops have sustained at least moderate traumatic brain injuries.  And studies show that as many as one in six Iraq and Afghanistan veterans have reported symptoms of PTSD.  Similar numbers have reported signs of post-deployment depression.
Now, I want to be clear on this point:  These combat-related mental health challenges are natural, normal, human responses to the violence of war.  They are not in any way a sign of weakness, and they should never be a source of shame or a cause for stigma.  (Applause.)  But too often, these conditions are misunderstood or misdiagnosed.  And also, many of our veterans and military families don’t live in military communities, or they don’t have a VA hospital nearby.  So when they seek help, they often rely on local clinics and hospitals; places where health professionals don’t always have the information and training they need to provide the care that America's heroes deserve.
But we know that training exists.  We know that information is out there.  We know that high quality of care is possible, and we see examples every day, all across this country.  At the University of Detroit Mercy School of Nursing, nursing students are working with engineering students to design devices that will help veterans with disabilities return to the activities they love.  And they recently worked with a veteran who had trouble grasping objects and holding his arms steady.  With the device they built for him, he's been able to resume his favorite hobbies -- hunting and photography.  And that’s so important.  Nurses were right there.
At the San Diego State University School of Nursing, they're helping run a program for troops and veterans and their spouses.  During weekend retreats, they work with these couples on restoring their relationships after deployments.  And they cover everything from problem solving and communication skills to dealing with trauma and stress.
And at the University of South Florida College of Nursing, they're even testing a new therapy to treat PTSD.  And one of their patients is a veteran named Josh Thomas.  And since returning from Afghanistan, Josh had been suffering from insomnia, anxiety, nightmares, high blood pressure, depression.  But after just two therapy sessions, he saw dramatic improvements.  And as he put it -- and these are his words -- he said, "before the therapy, I didn’t feel I had any control over my life, or the sinking feeling of drowning.  But after the second session, I feel I have some control, and am actually swimming -- getting somewhere.  This therapy changed my life."  Those were his words.
And ultimately, that’s what this new initiative that we're announcing today is all about.  It's about insuring that nurses across this country have that kind of information; have the tools and also the training they need to change the lives of our veterans and military families.  And that is the least we can do for the men and women who have served this country so bravely. 
And I cannot say it again -- as Jill said before -- these people answer the call.  I know we have a number of these wonderful heroes with us today.  So to all of you, and our men and women in uniform all across the country who may be watching this, I want to send a very clear message to all of you, particularly on this issue:  No matter what you're going through, America will be there for you and your families.  That’s what this is about.  (Applause.) 
And Jill and I have seen it.  People are ready to step up for you.  So if you need help, don’t be afraid to ask for it -- because we also know that that’s your training too, you don’t ask for help, and you handle things so well.  But don’t be afraid.  If you know someone else who's struggling, encourage them to get the support they need.  Seeking help is not a sign of weakness; in fact, it's a sign of strength.  It can set an example for those who served alongside of you, and it can also help eliminate any remaining stigma that surrounds conditions like PTSD and TBI and post-deployment depression. 
And with the new commitment that we're announcing today, we'll be doing our part to ensure that no matter where you turn to for help, America's single largest health care workforces -- more than 3 million nurses -- will be ready to meet your needs. 
So ask for help.  We want to ensure that no matter where you live, you will find providers who make you feel comfortable.  That’s the first step -- we want you to feel comfortable.  People who understand your unique challenges and who will give you a level of care that honors your service and your sacrifice.  So thank you.
And to all of the nurses and nursing students here today and across this country, I want to be clear that we need your leadership, not just in this area -- in our hospitals and clinics and doctor's offices -- we need your leadership period.  Because in addition to being health professionals, you are also neighbors and friends, and active members of your schools and your communities, and we need you to be leaders in those capacities as well when it comes to this issue. 
We need you to educate people about the challenges that our veterans and military families are facing.  As you learn and grow, we need you to spread the word.  We need you to work with your employers to better support our veterans as they transition to civilian life.  We need you to work with teachers and coaches and youth group leaders to help them understand that our military kids are going through a lot as well.
All of you have a critically important role to play in this mission.  And it's not just because you are nurses, but because you all are good citizens, and you have that compassion.  That’s why we have made this new initiative a centerpiece of our work through Joining Forces.  Because with your expertise as nurses, we know that people will listen to you -- people will listen to you.  We know that people will trust what you have to say.  And we know that by joining forces with all of you and millions of nurses across this country, we can serve our men and women in uniform and their families as well as they have served this country.  That’s what this is all about.
So I want to, once again, thank all you and all of the nursing schools and organizations that are leading the way.  This is truly amazing, what you're doing.  And you're doing work that will have an impact.  I mean, just imagine the spouse or the military kid who walks into your office or your clinic, or into whatever environment, and they've got somebody who can listen.  They've got somebody who has training, somebody who has dealt in this world and can make them feel just a little safer.  That’s our duty.  That’s the sacrem -- sacred promise, as Jill said, that we have to these men and women in uniform.
So I look forward to working with all of you to ensure that our veterans and military families get the world-class care that they deserve.  And congratulations on all the work that you are going to do.  It is going to be fabulous.  I can't wait to see you there, especially the students.  So work hard.  Get good grades.  Stay out of trouble.  (Laughter.) 
Thank you all.  God bless.  (Applause.)
END
3:16 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 11, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at the Joining Forces Anniversary event
South Lawn
11:13 A.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  What a great day for a celebration.  Thank you, General Dempsey, for that kind introduction and for all that you have done to support the Joining Forces initiative over the past year.  I also want to thank Deanie Dempsey, who's been a wonderful partner and a wonderful friend.  Thank you for your leadership.  (Applause.) 
To the Joining Forces Community Challenge finalists who are here, it was great to see you all yesterday, and we're delighted to have you here at the White House this morning. 
One of the best parts of my role as Second Lady is spending time with military veterans and families.  And I've traveled across the -- as I've traveled across the country and the world, I'm always inspired by the strength and the resilience of our military families.
While the troops serving our nation may be only 1 percent of the population, we want to make sure that 100 percent of Americans are supporting them.  Our military families have done so much for our country and each of us can do something in return.  That’s why the First Lady and I created Joining Forces to encourage all Americans to support and honor our military families. 
Since we launched Joining Forces a year ago, we have been so inspired by the many ways Americans all across the country are honoring, celebrating and supporting our military families.  Our partners in this effort are businesses, schools, churches, communities and individuals.  The Joining Forces Community Challenge finalists here today are shining examples of what we’ve seen.
Organizations like HeartsApart.org -- photographers volunteer their time to take photos of soon-to-be deployed servicemembers and their families.  And so that they can carry their loved ones when they are serving us, these beautiful photographs are printed on waterproof, durable cards that fit perfectly in the pocket of a battle dress uniform. 
Programs like GreenCare for Troops, which connects local green industry professionals with military families to provide free lawn and landscaping services while their loved ones are serving our country.
Or the city of Richfield, Utah, an entire community that has supported its local Army National Guard through four deployments since September 11, 2001.  They’ve organized a community-sponsored holiday party for the families of deployed troops.  The local newspaper delivers the hometown paper to deployed soldiers so that they can stay in touch with home.  And the community library ordered children’s books about deployment so that children will understand what their parents are doing while they are away.
These are just a few examples of what is happening all across our country.  If I had to sum up what we have seen since launching Joining Forces in one word, it would be “inspiring.”  These efforts aren’t always in the headlines, but they support our military families every single day in real and meaningful ways.  That's exactly what the First Lady and I set out to accomplish with Joining Forces. 
So please, let’s give a round of applause for all the Challenge winners who are here with us today.  (Applause.)
I am also proud to announce that after the wonderful response this first year, we will start another challenge later this year.  We look forward to seeing more of the creative ways that Americans are giving back to our proud and brave military families. 
And now it is my great pleasure to introduce an amazing, young woman.  I met Moranda Hern two years ago when she came to my office to tell me what it was like for her when her dad was deployed to Afghanistan.  She was going through all the challenges of being a teenager with the added burden of worrying every day about her father's safety. 
Moranda's dad is in the California National Guard, so she didn’t have the support of a military community and she felt disconnected from her peers.  When Moranda met another military teen, she realized she wasn’t alone.  The girls created a support network called The Sisterhood of the Traveling BDUs* -- to make sure other military girls had a way to share their experiences with one another.  Today the Sisterhood connects military girls through an online community and is expanding nationwide.
Moranda is here today as a military daughter and the founder of an initiative that has made a real difference in the lives of military children.  Now, as you can see, she wears a uniform herself.  She is pursuing her dream of becoming a pilot as a sophomore at the United States Air Force Academy.
I'm so proud to introduce Moranda Hern.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)
 
* * * * *
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you, everyone.  Please be seated.  Welcome.  Welcome to the White House.  And happy anniversary.
I want to begin by thanking Moranda for that lovely introduction.  But she is the reason why we do this.  I mean, enough said.  There are thousands of amazing kids like her all over this country that need to have this light shined on them.  So we are so proud of you, so very proud of you -- and the others like you.  So keep it up.
I also want to recognize Tom Brokaw, who has been such an advocate for our men and women in uniform.  He has been amazing. And we are privileged to have him with us today and have his voice out there so passionately on behalf of families and troops.
Of course, I want to thank General Dempsey and Deanie.  They have just been amazing partners.  I think I spend more time with you all than I do my husband -- (laughter) -- which isn't bad, isn't bad, not too bad.  But they have just been tremendous.  And I can't thank you both enough for what you have done for this country, what you are doing and I know you will continue to do for the rest of your lives.  So we wouldn’t be here without you.
And of course, I want to thank my partner in crime, Dr. Jill Biden.  She is, as you know, a proud military mom, very passionate.  She is really just a tremendous friend, just a true inspiration for me.  This would not be as much fun if I didn’t have her by my side.  And she has done just an amazing job, and we need to give her another round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
And of course, I want to join Jill in congratulating the winners of the Joining Forces Community Challenge.  We are so happy that all of you have been able to come and travel here to D.C.  And you’ve been spending a little time in the city.  I understand that there was a wonderful reception and roundtable yesterday that I missed, but I hear was just wonderful.  And you’ve been able to get some tours around town.  I hope everybody has been nice.  And there’s going to be a luncheon for you all today.  So, hopefully, the food will be good. 
But we are just thrilled to have you in our nation’s backyard to congratulate and honor all that you’re doing.  So thank you again.
I also want to recognize Congressman Al Green who is here. San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro is here as well.  Thank you both for being here.  And, finally, I want to thank each and every one of you for taking the time to be here this morning.
 
We have many people in the audience.  We have our troops and military families here, but we also have government and military leaders, business and nonprofit leaders, leaders from our faith communities, our schools, our hospitals, our veterans’ service organizations and so many others.  And I am thrilled that all of you could be here today as we celebrate the one-year anniversary of Joining Forces.
 
Now, I have to tell you that when Jill and I first started talking about launching this initiative to honor and support our veterans and military families, we knew that we were going to get a pretty good amount of support, because after all, every American is proud of our men and women in uniform.  So we knew that the emotion was there; we knew that the feelings were there.  So we knew we were going to get some support, because we all want to show our gratitude for their service.
But the outpouring of support that we have seen over this last year -- I mean, the hours logged, the services donated, the love and devotion and offers to help that have poured in from every corner of the country -- all of that has far surpassed even our wildest expectations.  And that’s a good thing.
And I tell military families all around, that’s really what we want you to know, is that you do live in a grateful nation, and when people are asked on your behalf they are stepping up and they are doing it gladly.  Over the past year, more than 1,600 businesses have hired more than 50,000 veterans and spouses, and they pledged to hire at least 160,000 more in the coming years.  And I know they’re going to do even more than that -- that’s just the pledges that we’ve gotten.
Technology and employment companies like Google, Monster and LinkedIn, they have stepped up to help connect veterans with good jobs.  We’ve had state leaders that are passing legislation to make it easier for military spouses to renew their professional licenses and get back to work as their families move from state to state.  And we hope that we’re going to see that kind of initiative throughout the country.
Medical schools are training our next generation of health care providers so that they can better care for our military families.  The Departments of Defense, Veterans Affairs, Treasury, Labor, they have all made groundbreaking announcements to support our nation’s veterans, our wounded warriors, our caregivers and our military spouses. 
Associations of doctors, nurses, physician’s assistants and social workers, they’re working to improve the treatment that they provide for Post-Traumatic Stress and Traumatic Brain Injuries. 
School professionals are reaching out to our military kids in ways that are so important.  High schools have -- with high numbers of military students -- are adding more Advanced Placement courses so that these kids have the opportunities they deserve to compete for college. 
If you watch TV, you’ve seen all of the activity on the airwaves.  TV shows like “Extreme Makeover: Home Edition”, “Sesame Street” -- our favorites -- (laughter) -- and organizations like NASCAR, AOL, Disney, they’re all sharing stories of military families and using those stories not just to shine a light, but to encourage others to serve. 
You’ve got wonderful people like Tom Hanks, Oprah, Steven Spielberg -- they starred in a series of very powerful PSAs.  And then, of course, the episode that has made me a fan favorite in every household -- I am now more popular than the President  -- because I was on “iCarly.”  (Laughter.)  There are kids who probably didn’t know I was First Lady, but they know I was on “iCarly.”  (Laughter.)  And that episode -- they focused the entire episode on the experience of military children.  It was wonderful.  It really got the message out to young people in a way that we could never do on our own.
So over the past year, not a single person that we’ve talked to, that we have approached, has told us that they could not help -- not a single person.  We’ve asked; they said yes.
And the good thing is, is that once people get started, they just keep coming up with new ideas on their own.  We’ll present something, and they double it.  They want to do even more.  They just keep raising their goals even higher.  They just keep figuring out how to get more and more people involved.
A wonderful example is Operation Honor Cards.  It’s a wonderful initiative that asks Americans to honor our military families by pledging service of their own.  And when we first sat down with this organization last year, they set a goal of getting 3 million hours of pledge service from people all across the country.  But then what happened was that by June, they had already doubled that number; and then by November, they hit 10 million hours -- just by November.  And today, we can announce that we’re at 21 million hours pledged -- 21 million hours pledged -- with already 30 million total hours served.  (Applause.)  
Now, that's really the story of Joining Forces.  That's what we are celebrating today.  That's truly what is going on through Joining Forces.  It is the story of a wave of support that spreads across this country, and it’s reaching more communities every single day. 
But the real impact of Joining Forces over this past year truly cannot be measured just by a list of accomplishments.  It can't be explained with numbers or hours or dollar amounts.  The true measure of our success lies in the lives that we’ve helped to change -- all of us, everyone here -- those lives, all those moms and dads out there, all of those sons and daughters, like Moranda, all the grandparents who have felt the love and the support of a grateful nation. 
They are heroes like my good buddy, Johnny Agbi -- Sergeant Agbi.  He's quite a character; got to spend some time with him.  He was wounded in Afghanistan, and he's here with us today.  And thanks to Sears and Rebuild Together, who worked together to refit his house for his wheelchair -- and Jill and I got to write on his wall -- I hope our signatures are still there.  Are they there?  (Laughter.)  All right, that’s good.  We got to write on his wall.  But thanks to their efforts, Sergeant Agbi can now more easily get in his front door -- something as simple as that.  He can now move around his home more freely.  And hopefully, everything feels just a little bit more like home again.
They are spouses like Ann Wells, who Jill and I got to meet.  She's a nurse who, because of the licensing portability efforts in the states may not have to deal with so much bureaucracy the next time her family moves and she needs to recertify before she can get a job.
They are veterans like Joshua Rassi, from Beaverton, Oregon.  Now, in 2007, Sergeant Rassi joined the Army and was trained as a geospatial analyst -- you guys probably know what that is, right?  You Joint Chief types, right?  He was deployed to Iraq, where he was in charge of securing convoys, checking roads for IEDs.  He managed many, many soldiers, communicating detailed information throughout his unit.  But when he left active duty in May of 2010, he couldn’t find consistent work.  He couldn’t find consistent work back home.  For more than a year he was out of consistent work.  This highly trained soldier applied everywhere, but his searches ended in frustration.
Then last September, he went to one of the Chamber of Commerce's hiring fairs in Portland.  And the Red Cross liked what they saw at this fair.  And within a week, Sergeant Rassi had started a new job with the Red Cross as a lab technician.  And he has been working for six months.  And he is thankful not just for the income, not just because his skills are no longer idle, but because it gives him an opportunity to keep giving back to the country that he loves.
And, as he said -- and these are his words -- he said, "Part of the reason I joined the military was getting to serve, and at the Red Cross I’m doing the same thing.  My big thing in life is making a difference."  And that’s how deeply ingrained service is to our men and women in uniform.  That is the greatness that we all feel when we travel the country.  That’s why you guys hook us in.  It is that ethic of service.  It’s that commitment to this country that we want to honor through Joining Forces.
I always say if all of our young people could just get a little dose of what you all have, then they would be just fine.  Just fine.  This effort is about making an impact.  It is about repaying our debt to our veterans and military families.  It’s about giving these heroes the opportunities they deserve.
 
But I want to be clear that we are not here to pat ourselves on the back.  We’re not here just to throw a nice party or to list our accomplishments.  We’re here to really, truly make a difference for these families who have put everything on the line for all of us.  So while today is certainly a time for celebration, it’s also a time to renew our call of action.  That’s why we’d like to mark the sand with an anniversary, because it’s time to say this is what we’ve done, but there is so much more to do.  It’s time for us to redouble our efforts. 
So today, I want to challenge all of you here, and I want to challenge Americans all across the country, to keep raising the bar, just keep raising the bar.  Keep bringing more people into the fold -- the fold of Joining Forces, the fold of whatever it is you are doing, keep bringing people in.  Keep coming up with new ideas.
And one message to all of the military families here today and watching around the country:  I want you to know that these are not just words.  We are not giving out empty promises -- not on my watch, not on Jill’s watch.  We’re going to keep working until all of our veterans know that when they hit the job market, their skills be rewarded.  We’re not stopping until every military student gets an educational experience that honors their service.  We’re not calling it a day until all of our military spouses can rest assured that the next time their family is transferred, they won’t have to leave their job behind.
And we’re going to keep working.  We’re going to keep persuading.  We’re going to keep driving forward until all of our nation’s military families feel in real and concrete ways the love and support and gratitude that we all hold in our hearts.  That is our simple promise to you.  And it is one of the best things that we all do with our time. 
And as Tom said, this is a forever proposition.  This is not a blue state or red state proposition.  This is something that we want to make a part of the culture of the United States of America, that every citizen feels this level of gratitude and finds some way to give something back.  And if we can do our part by shining a light on this effort, then we will continue to do that.
So I want to thank you all for everything that you have done, for leading the way in your communities across this country.  Keep it going.  We are so proud of all of you.  We are grateful.  So God bless you all.  And God bless the United States of America.  Enjoy the rest of your time here in Washington.  (Applause.)
END  
11:39 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 28, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden on Manufacturing at a Campaign Event
PCT ENGINEERING
DAVENPORT, IOWA
12:26 P.M. CDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hello, everybody.  How are you?  (Applause.)  It’s good to be back in Davenport, the Quad Cities.  (Applause.)
Mr. Mayor, thank you for flying back from Brazil and getting off a plane and coming straight here.  If I were you, I’d be home in bed trying to catch up on my sleep.  And I want to tell you something, I know I’m back in Iowa when the guy introducing you from the factory floor speaks better than you do, I know I’m back in -- I know I’m back in Iowa.  (Laughter and applause.)  Incredible state.  You’re an incredible state.
I understand the Mayor of Eldridge is here and -- Martin O’Boyle.  Terry, thank you for the opportunity of allowing me on the factory floor here, and I understand the chancellor of Eastern Iowa Community College, Don Doucette, is here.  Don, where are you?  Thank you very much, Don.  I’m going to talk about what you guys are doing in just a minute.
And, folks, first of all, as it relates to the story that was just told by Chuck, it reminds me, my dad used to have an expression.  He’d say -- I mean this sincerely, a guy who had lost jobs, a guy who had to move and move his family -- he said, Joey, you got to understand one thing, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck.  It’s about your dignity.  It’s about your respect.  It’s about your sense of yourself.  It’s about your place in the community.
And too many people have been stripped of their dignity as a consequence of this God-awful recession we’ve inherited.  And we’re determined -- we’re determined -- I think all of us, Republican and Democrat -- are determined to turn that around.
But first I want to thank -- I want to thank Terry, the president of PCT, and I also want to thank the community college for doing what is a remarkable thing that's happening all across America, for partnering -- for partnering with this great company and producing jobs, making sure the skills available match the needs.
Ladies and gentlemen, I come here today with a very, very simple message:  Manufacturing is back.  Manufacturing is back.  (Applause.)
And, folks, that's not only good news for Chuck and all the fellow workers here on this factory floor, it’s good news for America.  But it’s even better news for America’s middle class.  (Applause.)  They’ve taken an awful beating over the last decade or more, and what’s happened just in the last couple years:  430,000 new manufacturing jobs just since 2010; more than 15,000 new manufacturing jobs here in the state of Iowa; the fastest growth in manufacturing since the ‘90s.
After years of hearing the word outsourcing, our children are going to hear a new word as much as we heard outsourcing.  It’s called insourcing.  It’s called insourcing.  (Applause.)
Because, folks, the facts are -- and you’re going to see more of them -- the facts are that the jobs that left the United States are coming back to the United States.  Plants that closed are opening, opening and reinvented.  Companies like John Deere expanding here in Davenport and in Waterloo and in Des Moines, where they added nearly 500 new jobs in the past two years, good paying jobs.  Siemens Wind employs 500 people at Fort Madison.  Sixty-five percent of them used to work in companies in the area that are either closed or downsized.  So, folks, America is coming back.  It’s not a political slogan; it’s a reality.  And it’s happening in the sector that built the middle class in manufacturing.
Look, you know a lot of my Republican friends and some of our political opponents wonder why the President and I have spent so much time working to bring manufacturing back.  No one in the Heartland has to wonder about that.  You all know why.  You all know why because you were the manufacturing center of the world, and you saw what happened when those jobs were lost. 
You know that manufacturing jobs just aren’t any old jobs.  They are good paying jobs; jobs you can raise a family on.  Jobs that allow you to own a home and not just rent; jobs that give you the promise of being able to send your kid to college.  And here in Iowa, the average manufacturing job pays almost $50,000 a year.  And they’re jobs that matter to everyone, as was mentioned by Chuck, because they not only are good for America -- they’re good for America, because they make America competitive again.  And they’re jobs of building products of the future in industries of the future for an economy that’s able to compete for the future, products like the electronic beam systems built here at PCT -- remarkable.
These are jobs building products that export to consumers not just here but all around the world, expanding world markets for the United States of America.  You know about that too.  Fifty percent -- all the workers here know that 50 percent of what they produce here at PCT Engineering are sales that are destined to be exported.  That’s a big deal.
 
They’re jobs that anchor our communities.  They’re jobs that get the local community moving again, manufacturing jobs.  Manufacturing jobs create more jobs, other jobs -- jobs in diners, hardware stores, schools, police departments.  But most importantly, they’re jobs that can help rebuild the middle class, which has been battered.  And nobody knows it better than all of you.
Look, it matters because real growth, growth that is widely shared, the only growth that really matters -- growth that is widely shared by everyone in this country -- can only happen when the middle class is growing again.  When the middle class is growing, everyone does well.  The wealthy do very well, as they should, and those who are not wealthy have a shot, a ladder maybe they can climb up to change their circumstance.
But the middle class will only grow if we build an economy that can support the middle class.  And manufacturing is not the only part, but it’s a critical part to bringing back the middle class.  And no one knows that better than the people of Iowa, who know the essential role that -- it’s not only manufacturing.  Look at Iowa and agriculture and the role agriculture plays in the economic health and well-being of this nation.  That’s why the President and I are so proud that last year farm exports reached a record high of $137 billion, $23 billion higher than ever before.
 
That’s not only good for the economic well-being of Iowa farmers, it’s good for the economic well-being of the entire country.  And with the new trade agreements the President negotiated, we expect an additional $2.3 billion in the coming years in agricultural products supporting an additional 20,000 jobs here at home.  But it’s not only the agricultural sector that’s going to benefit from these new trade agreements.  It will create tens of thousands of more jobs in manufacturing in the high-tech sector because of these agreements.
And, folks, we’re not just fighting harder to be able to export our products -- agriculture or manufactured -- abroad.  They’re important, but we’re fighting to export complex, high-tech services as well, services that Americans provide better than any other people in the world, but things most people don’t think about -- (applause) -- things most don't think about, that they contribute and contribute tens of billions of dollars to our economy like construction, engineering, health care technology, IT.  We do that better than anyone in the world.
We recently signed an agreement, after my negotiations with the Vice President of China, opening America’s automobile insurance industry to the largest automobile market in the world.  You say, what does that have to do?  If you have access for American automobile insurance companies to sell insurance, which has been blocked up to now, in China to the largest number of folks in the world who drive automobiles, that’s real money.  That’s real jobs.  That’s real jobs back here at home.
   
But ultimately, it all comes down to the same question, the real question, quite frankly, of this election and the challenge of our time -- will we be a country that values the role of workers in the success of businesses and values the middle class in the success of the economy or are we going to move backwards to the same disastrous philosophy that rewarded speculators rather than builders?
Look, this is the third in a series of speeches I’m giving on behalf of our administration laying out the stark choices we believe the American people are going to face in November and what’s at stake for the middle class.  Today, I want to focus primarily on manufacturing because President Obama and I -- President Obama and I have been working to rebuild our manufacturing sector and rebuild our country because we think they're one and the same.  We don't know how you do one without the other.  We don't know how you leave it out, manufacturing and rebuild the country.
So let me tell you what we’ve done, but maybe equally as important, let me tell you what we think we have to do, what more we have to do.  When we came into office, the manufacturing sector, had been neglected badly and was getting devastated.
During the 2000s, before we came in, 5.8 million manufacturing jobs were lost in the United States of America.  Right here in Iowa, you lost 53,000 manufacturing jobs.  You saw companies like Maytag and Electolux and many others close shop.  Thousands of factories closed out and laid off workers, a lot of them reopened in places like Vietnam, Mexico, China, “cheaper markets.”  And we were told -- how many times have you been told over the last 15 years that America’s days as a leading manufacturer in the world had passed? 
Look, the President and I said, where is it written, where is it written that says our day has passed in anything?  The President and I fundamentally disagreed with that proposition.  And by the way, it was a widely held proposition, not just with our friends on the other side, with a whole lot of people. 
We knew -- we knew we had to get manufacturing back on its feet again because for every one of those manufacturing jobs lost, somebody lost their place in the middle class.  For every one of those jobs lost.
So we went to work first and foremost over significant opposition, and with Mitt Romney arguing that we should let Detroit go bankrupt. 
AUDIENCE MEMBERS:  Booo!
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  What we did is we rescued the auto industry.  We administered some of the very toughest medicine -- (Applause.)  We were criticized by many on our side.  We administered some very tough medicine, but together we saved literally 1 million jobs.
And since restructuring, the industry has already added back another 200,000 jobs and GM is leading the world again as the world’s largest automobile manufacturer.  (Applause.)
Folks, we knew that was essential, but not enough, so we went to work to provide a skilled workforce for companies that have already come back or are bringing their folks back.  We met with the leading companies in the world who came to the White House in January.  They pointed out to us that right now there are 600,000 manufacturing jobs in the United States that companies who have come back home can't fill because of their inability to match the workers’ skills with the need of the companies.
So we launched a partnership between what my wife, Jill, who is a community college professor, calls the best-kept secret -- (Applause.)  Beautiful.  What my wife, Jill, calls the best-kept secret in America, American community colleges.  And businesses looking to fill those 600,000 slots married up with them.
We’ve also proposed an $8 billion partnership to give more momentum to this effort.  My wife and the Secretary of Labor, Secretary Solis, just did an 800-mile bus trip, starting off in Iowa, working all the way -- their way through Tennessee, Kentucky, Virginia, North Carolina, visiting community college and business after community college and business, providing hundreds and hundreds of good paying jobs because they're training directly, exactly what the companies need. 
And it was all over the countryside, from Tennessee, to North Carolina, to Michigan, Ohio, New Hampshire, and it’s working.  So let me say it again, thank you, Terry.  And thank you, Dr. Paper, and thank you, Chancellor -- Dr. Paper, and thank you, Chancellor, for this partnership of yours.  You are one of the reasons why.  You’re literally one of the reasons why American companies are now insourcing instead of outsourcing.
We’ve committed to breaking down barriers that block access of American products to overseas markets, so the rest of the world and the consumers can understand what we already know, that we make the best products.  No one makes a better product than American workers, and there’s no worker in the world more productive than an American worker.  That's not hyperbole.  That is a fact.  That is literally a fact.  (Applause.)
In addition, the President has signed into law three free trade agreement with Korea, Colombia and Panama.  They're going to open up markets for the best products in the world -- for the best products in the world, Made in America products, to all those countries, which now can't get into those countries and are committed to leveling the playing field across the board.
To that end, we created for the first time a thing we call the Trade Enforcement Unit, whose sole job is to crack down on countries that pursue unfair trade practices.  We’re not -- we don't think that's a trade war.  We think that's a fair way to trade.  And so just this month, we brought a new trade case against China. 
China is unfairly limiting American access to so-called rare earth materials that they possess, that are needed by American manufacturers to make high-tech products like electronic vehicles and advanced electronics.
We changed the tax code to give a 30 percent tax credit to a company that builds wind turbines, solar panels or other clean energy products here in the United States rather than abroad.  (Applause.)  The result so far -- the result so far is $2.3 billion of new investment in factories built here in the United States of America, rather than abroad.  (Applause.)
Look, even more to come as they invest in new plants and equipment right now, right now if they invest, by allowing them to write off more rapidly the cost of the factory, the cost of the equipment, the cost of their vehicles so they can expand opportunities.  That means more people being hired.
The bottom line is we’re changing the paradigm here.  We’re rewarding instead of penalizing American companies that invest in building and hiring here in America, and manufacturers are responding.  They're hiring workers by the hundreds of thousands.  They're exploiting products all around the world. 
With this added incentive, we’re on pace to double, as the President committed to, double American exports by the year 2015.  And let me translate what that means, if we double American exports by the year 2015, that creates another 2 million American jobs.  (Applause.)
So, folks -- so all those skeptics and our Republican opponents who -- especially don't tell me that America can't make things anymore; can't compete in the world market anymore; can't lead the world again any more.  We will lead the world again in every aspect of the economy.  (Applause.)
And, folks, we’ve already begun.  You’ve begun -- not me -- you’ve begun, and we’re not done.  For years, American manufacturers have faced one of the highest tax rates in the world.  We want to reduce that by over 20 percent.  We want to drop the rate particularly for high-tech manufacturers like you, Mr. President, even further than the 20 percent.  We want to create what’s called a global minimum tax, because American taxpayers shouldn’t be providing a larger subsidy for investing abroad than investing at home.  (Applause.)
Look, we want to end and we want to end it right now, the practice of getting a tax break, which you saw happen here in Iowa for dismantling a factory, floor to ceiling, and shipping it abroad and getting a moving expense to go abroad.  Instead, we should be giving a tax credit to companies that dismantle factories abroad and bring them back home.  (Applause.)
 
Look, this and a lot of other ways is why we’re bringing American manufacturing back and it’s how we’re going to grow the middle class.  Look, folks, conventional wisdom that manufacturing is dead in this country is dead wrong -- dead wrong -- and we’ve got to maintain this momentum.  But if you’ll forgive me for saying this, one thing that could bring this momentum to a screeching halt is turning over the keys of the White House to Santorum or Romney.  (Applause.)
Look, they’re both good guys.  They’re both good guys and I’ve worked with Rick for a long time.  Senator Santorum is the only one of them who is even claiming to care about manufacturing, but his Senate record tells a different story.  He voted against ending loopholes for companies that move manufacturing jobs offshore, from America offshore.  And just like Mitt Romney, when asked if we should have rescued the automobile industry, he said, “No, absolutely not.”
But if Senator Santorum has been inconsistent in what he has said and what he has done, Mitt Romney has been remarkably consistent -- (laughter) -- as an investor/businessman, as the governor of Massachusetts, and now as a candidate for President, remarkably consistent and I respectfully suggest, consistently wrong.  (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, when he was CEO of Bain Capital, Bain Capital closed down two factories in South Florida that made medical devices, moving the production to Germany.  They shut down a plant in South Carolina and cut jobs in another one in Rhode Island that made photo albums and picture frames and outsourced production overseas.  I’m tempted to say, Mitt, thanks for the memories.  (Laughter.)  You know what I mean?
As governor of Massachusetts, he repeatedly slashed funding for workforce training in manufacturing specifically.  And despite the fact that millions of taxpayer dollars were flowing to companies outsourcing state services like overseas call centers, he vetoed a bill passed by the Massachusetts legislature that would have stopped the state from outsourcing contracts overseas, state contracts.
Look, think about it, a Massachusetts taxpayer with a question -- this is how it works -- with a question about Massachusetts state services, picks up the phone, dials an 800 number expecting to talk to somebody in the Massachusetts government to get an answer to their question.  And instead, he talking to -- or she’s talking to someone on the other side of the world and all of it paid for by his or her tax dollars.  I find that kind of fascinating.  (Laughter.)  No, I really mean it.  I mean, that’s one when I was told about, I said, I’m not going to say that until you fact check that for me again.
  
But think about it, it’s one thing for the local company to outsource a call service, but for the state government to outsource a call service that’s set up to answer questions for people in the state about a problem they have with the government, to outsource that, denying folks in Massachusetts the jobs that are attendant to that?  Is it any surprise to you that Massachusetts, under Governor Romney, was losing manufacturing jobs twice as fast as the rest of the country?
 
Now, as a presidential candidate, he has proposed a new international tax system that zeroes out taxes for companies that create jobs outside the United States of America.  I’m not making this stuff up.
 
Look, your -- President Obama and Governor Romney, Joe Biden, and whoever the nominee is going to be, we are talking about taxes and the burden on manufacturers.  But there’s a big difference.  Our tax cuts go to companies that create jobs over here.  The Romney tax cut goes to companies that create jobs overseas.  It’s a fundamentally different philosophy from ours.
 
When China was dumping tires into the international marketplace, hurting American manufacturers of tires and their workers, President Obama stepped up and enforced our trade laws and won.  Governor Romney, at the time, called what the President has done protectionism.  That’s his quote -- “protectionism.”  Now, when it’s politically expedient, he wants to get really tough on China.
 
Look, it’s a different philosophy.  Governor Romney has called the President of the United States “out of touch” -- that's a quote, “out of touch” -- for encouraging young people to try to get manufacturing jobs.  Out of touch?  Romney?  (Laughter and applause.)  I mean, pretty remarkable, pretty remarkable.  As an old friend of mine says, that’s chutzpah.  (Laughter.)  Look, the Wall Street Journal wrote, “Romney appeared to scoff first in Detroit, then in Florida at the notion of manufacturing as a job engine for the future.”
 
So, look, folks, we have a choice in this election between our philosophy that believes manufacturing is central to our economy and their philosophy that scoffs at it, between our philosophy that says there is nothing out of touch about fighting for the future of the middle class by creating manufacturing jobs -- a philosophy that says if the folks at the top -- and their philosophy says if the folks at the top do well, everything else will do well.  How many times have you heard about the job creators?
 
Look, Governor Romney’s business practices and his policies have clearly benefited the wealthy and most powerful among us, often at the expense of working and middle-class families.  They actually believe it’s the best way.  I’m not doubting their belief.  But it just doesn’t work that way.
As the President said, and I quote, "this" -- meaning the middle class -- "this is the defining issue of our time.  This is a make-or-break moment for the middle class, and for all those who are fighting to get into the middle class.”
Folks, I stood outside of a lot of plant gates in my career, both here in this state, the state of Iowa, and in my home state of Delaware, shaking hands and asking for support.  I've also stood outside those gates -- like the General Motors gate of my home state -- asking those -- when those workers needed my help because the plant was shutting down, going somewhere else.  Those are the days that stick with me the most in my career.
Those are the days when the longest walk that these folks were taking wasn't from the factory floor to the parking lot for the last time, it was up that flight of stairs they had to go up once they got home into their child's bedroom to say, Honey, I'm sorry but you're not going to be able to go back to Roosevelt High School, or St. Mary's, or not be able to be in that little league; Daddy, Mommy, I lost my job.  We've got to do something else.
My dad made that walk when I was young.  An awful lot of kids heard the same words I heard, except the difference between then and now was that my father said everything was going to be okay.  In the mid ‘50s he believed it, and I believed it.  So many people have made that walk in the recent past five, six, seven years, and they can't even say with certainty when they look at their child up until now, it's going to be okay. 
But the good news is that today, hundreds of thousands of workers are replacing that longest walk with walks of a totally different journey.  (Applause.)  A journey that ends with workers who are able to come home and say, I've got a job -- just like you were.  (Applause.)  I've got a job.
They've been able to say, I've got a good job building amazing products that the world wants to buy.  That’s what makes me so optimistic.  We've got a way to go yet, but knowing these journeys are taking place again in the thousands -- more of them every single day. 
Look, some of you know me fairly well.  My entire career I've been characterized as an optimist, since I got elected as a 29-year-old kid to the Senate.  Well, I've got to tell you, I mean this sincerely, I've never been more optimistic in my life about the prospects for America.  (Applause.)  America today is better positioned than any country in the world to lead the 21st Century.  (Applause.) 
Folks, it's not just manufacturing that’s coming back.  The middle class is coming back.  America is coming back.  Worker by worker, home by home, neighborhood by neighborhood, the country is coming back.  So as my grandpop would say, keep the faith.  And thank you.  May God bless you all, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
12:55 P.M. CDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 March 20, 2012
Remarks by President Obama, Vice President Biden, and Prime Minister Kenny of Ireland at St. Patrick's Day Reception
State Floor
7:04 P.M. EDT
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, welcome to the White House.  It’s great to see you all, and happy St. Patrick’s Day, or should I say, happy St. Patrick’s Week, the way it’s going.  (Applause.)
I’m lucky to be here with you all tonight.  I feel fortunate to have the honor to be able to welcome back Fionnuala Kenny and the Taoiseach.  They’ve been here before.  Some of you had a chance to meet them, and you’re going to get to see them again.
You know there’s and old Irish saying.  There’s all kinds of old Irish sayings.  (Laughter.)  At least my Grandfather Finnegan, I think he made them up, but it says, may the hinges of our friendship never go rusty.  Well, with these two folks that you’re about to meet, if you haven’t already, there’s no doubt about them staying oiled and lubricated here.  Ladies and gentlemen -- (laughter) -- now, for you who are not full Irish in this room, lubricating has a different meaning for us all.  (Laughter.)
Ladies and gentlemen, we’re here tonight to celebrate the friendship between two great nations, Ireland and the United States.  William Butler Yeats referred to Ireland as “a worldwide nation.”  Our Irish heritage has touched many, many people, many more people than could possibly fit on the beautiful Emerald Isle.
America and Ireland are the two nations that define me the most, and I expect most of you in this room.  Our countries share a bond that goes all the way back to the beginning of our country.  Eight Irishmen signed the Declaration of Independence, fully one-seventh of the signator.  Since then, half our Presidents have claimed Irish blood, including the one I’m about to introduce.  (Applause.)
And today our countries are tied together by 40 million Americans who descended from that beautiful island just across the sea, and -- but we share a lot more than blood.  And I think everyone here will understand this.  I think we share a set of values, a set of values that is sort of stamped into our DNA.
My mom, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden, used to say -- (laughter) -- honey, to be Irish is about family.  It’s about faith.  But most of all, it’s about courage.  She said that -- one of her sayings was, without courage -- without courage, you can't love with abandon.
And, ladies and gentlemen, for me that's the essence of being Irish:  passion and being able to love with abandon.  That's why my mom liked Barack, the President.  That's why she liked him so much.  I think the President got used to my mom during the campaign, Mr. Ambassador, referring to him all the time as, honey.  (Laughter.)  She’d grab his hand and say, now, Honey. 
Well, she thought that the President embodied all the things that she thought made Ireland and the Irish special, particularly his courage.  Ladies and gentlemen, this President abounds in courage.  So, ladies and gentlemen, let me introduce to you my four friends and your friends, the President of the United States and Michelle Obama, as well as the Taoiseach and Fionnuala Kenny.
Ladies and gentlemen.  (Applause.)
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Hello, everybody! 
AUDIENCE:  Hello!
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, welcome to the White House.  This does not sound like a shy crowd.  (Laughter.) 
As you may have noticed, today is not, in fact, St. Patrick's Day.  (Laughter.)  We just wanted to prove that America considers Ireland a dear and steadfast friend every day of the year.  (Applause.)  Some of you may have noticed we even brought the cherry blossoms out early for our Irish and Northern Irish visitors.  And we will be sure to plant these beautiful shamrocks right away.
I want to welcome back my good friend, Taoiseach Kenny, his extraordinary wife, Fionnuala.  This has been our third working visit in just over a year, and each one has been better than the last. 
I've had the pleasure to welcome back First Minister Peter Robinson, Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness of Northern Ireland, as well. 
And, everyone, please welcome my new friends from Moneygall, my long-lost cousin, Henry.  (Applause.)  His mother, Mary, is here as well.  And my favorite pub keeper, Ollie Hayes, is here with his beautiful wife.  (Applause.)  He was interested in hiring Michelle -- (laughter) -- when she was pouring a pint.  I said, she's too busy -- maybe at the end of our second term.  (Applause.)
In return, I did take them out for a pint at the Dubliner here in Washington, D.C. on Saturday.  That’s right, I saw some of you there.  (Laughter.)  I didn’t take pictures.  And I've asked them to please say hello to everybody back home for me.
Now, while there are too many Irish Americans to acknowledge by name here tonight, I do want to thank Martin O'Malley and his band for rocking the White House for the evening.  It's said that the curse of the Irish, as the Governor must know, is not that they don’t know the words to a song -- it's that they know them all.  (Laughter.) 
As you may know, I finally got to spend a day in Ireland with Michelle last May.  I visited my ancestral village of Moneygall, saw my great, great, great grandfather's house.  I had the distinct honor of addressing the Irish people from College Green in Dublin.  And when it comes to their famous reputation for hospitality and good cheer, the Irish outdid themselves.  Michelle and I received absolutely the warmest of welcomes, and I've been trying to return the favor as best I can.
There really was something magical about the whole day -- and I know that I'm not the only person who feels that way when they visit Ireland.  Even my most famously Irish American predecessor was surprised about how deeply Ireland affected him when he visited in his third year as President.  "It is strange," President Kennedy said on his last day in Ireland, "that so many years and so many generations pass, and still some of us who come on this trip could feel ourselves among neighbors, even though we are separated by generations, by time and by thousands of miles.”
I know most of you can relate to that.  I think anyone who’s had a chance to visit can relate.  And that’s why Jackie Kennedy later visited Ireland with her children and gave one of President Kennedy’s dog tags to his cousins in Dunganstown.  And that’s why I felt so at home when I visited Moneygall.
When my great, great, great, great, grandfather arrived in New York City after a voyage that began there, the St. Patrick’s Society in Brooklyn had just held its first annual banquet.  And a toast was made to family back home enduring what were impossibly difficult years:  “Though gloomy shadows, hang o’er thee now, as darkness is densest, even just before day, so thy gloom, truest Erin, may soon pass away.” 
Because for all the remarkable things the Irish have done in the course of human history, keeping alive the flame of knowledge in dark ages, outlasting a great hunger, forging a peace that once seemed impossible, the green strands they have woven into America’s heart -- from their tiniest villages through our greatest cities -- is something truly unique on the world stage. 
And these strands of affection will never fray, nor will they come undone.  While those times and the troubles of later generations were far graver than anything we could fathom today, many of our people are still fighting to get back on solid ground after several challenging years. 
But we choose to rise to these times for the same reason we rose to those tougher times:  Because we are all proud peoples who share more than sprawling family trees.  We are peoples who share an unshakeable faith, an unbending commitment to our fellow man, and a resilient and audacious hope.  And that’s why I say of Ireland tonight what I said in Dublin last May, this little country that inspires the biggest things -- its best days are still ahead.
So I propose a toast to the Taoiseach and the people of Ireland.  Do I have any -- where’s my drink?  (Laughter.)  Here it is, here it is.  All right, here we go.  It’s only water but  -- (laughter) -- obviously, somebody didn’t prepare.  (Laughter.)
To quote your first President, Douglas Hyde:  “A word is more lasting than the riches of the world.”  Tonight, grateful for our shared past and hopeful for our common future, I give my word to you, Mr. Prime Minister, and to the people of Ireland:  As long as I am President, you will have a strong friend, a steadfast ally, and a faithful partner in the United States of America. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Taoiseach Kenny.  (Applause.)
PRIME MINISTER KENNY:  Mr. President, Vice President Biden, Michelle, ladies and gentlemen, these have been an extraordinary few days in the relationships between Ireland and America.  Thank you for your warm invitation and for this warm welcome. 
(Speaks Irish)  May the blessings of St. Patrick be with you, your families and the American people. 
Ireland actually picked the best time of year for its national celebration.  (Laughter.)  It’s the time of year when the Earth turns at the Spring Equinox, and as they say, the sea spreads it far sun crop to the north.
This, indeed, is a blessed time, a time when we are thankful for our blessings, blessings of being a proud and noble Irish people; the blessings of a dazzling generosity of heart and mind, and of a glittering imagination; the blessing of our children, our families, our friends -- friends like America.
As Taoiseach, a year into this new government, I’m proud, indeed, to bring good news from home.  Thanks to the courage and the resilience and the sacrifice of the Irish people, the Irish ship of state now faces in the right direction.  Our economy is stabilizing.  Our exports are thriving.  Our international reputation is being restored.  Ireland is building itself a better future.
Today, Mr. President, Ireland thanks America.  We thank you for the centuries where you gave us shelter and refuge and opportunity, and above all, where you gave us hope.  (Applause.)
In the Irish language, we have many phrases, one of them is -- (Speaks Irish) -- That means:  Hope cures every misery.  It was that miracle -- hope that brought millions of Irish people to your shores yearning for a better life.  Not everybody survived that journey.  It is said that 80,000 Irish souls were lost in the Atlantic, victims of long hunger, of fever and of destitution.  Indeed, an ocean, a tide of lost ancestors, a bitter benediction of the waters dividing the old life and the new.
Well, tonight I remember them.  We honor them here in this White House -- designed by an Irish architect -- and in our national hearts.  (Applause.)  Because they were the price of a new life.  In the new country, in this new country of miraculous plenty, the survivors -- among them, one Falmouth Kearney -- walked straight off those ships.  But ironically, they never stopped looking back.  Because our research shows that while their fellow arrivals saw emigration as an opportunity, for the Irish it was always a tragedy.
There were the dispossessed -- their hearts, their minds in Ireland; their hopes and their futures in America -- the least likely of any nation ever to return home.  Which is why what makes the Irish and what they did for America all the more heroic, all the more remarkable, all the more noble.
Despite their longing for home, they gave their hands to work, their faith in God, their future to this United States of America.  They became heroes of their own stories, and, as a consequence, of America's story.
Mr. President, today, the Irish people are heroes of our own story.  Today, persistent and determined and proud, we answer your question of belief in ourselves, because we believe that our country and our nation will succeed. 
When you came last May to that small, intimate homecoming in College Green -- (laughter) -- just the two Obamas, half of the U.S. Secret Service -- (laughter) -- 100,000 enthralled Irish people -- you, sir, the young President, stood in front of the old Irish House of Lords and you promised that you would stand by us.  Well, sir, you and America have kept your word.  For Ireland, your door has been and is always open.  And for that we thank you.  (Applause.) 
That memorable day was also made very special by your trip, as you said, to the home of your ancestors in the village of Moneygall -- Henry VIII is almost as famous as yourself.  (Laughter.)  That’s because for all people of Irish heritage, the most important part of their visit to our country is always the trip to the homeplace. 
And as a prominent reminder, and on your behalf of your historic homecoming, Mr. President, it is my honor to present to you, on behalf of the Irish people and of the government, this formal certificate of Irish heritage.  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Look at that!  I love it.  That’s great.
PRIME MINISTER KENNY:  These are very rare.  (Laughter.)  As rare as the man himself.  (Laughter.)   
Next year, we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the homecoming of another one of our sons, John Fitzgerald Kennedy.  Next year, Ireland will gather her global family to herself in a year-long celebration of the ties of heart and hope and history that bind us and allow us to imagine together a better, brighter richer future.  We call it simply "The Gathering."
These are our new departures of hope and confidence and success.  And these are the new departures from which there will be no going back. 
This evening, Mr. President, I bring our current emigrants to the heart of these celebrations here in the (speaks Irish) of the White House. 
As you see, a light burns brightly within every one of these emigrants, and that’s the light of opportunity, of ambition, and of confidence.  But it is also the light of home.  Especially in this week of St. Patrick, my message to their parents and their families is this:  My work and that of my government, with your work and your government, is aimed at ensuring that these children -- Ireland's children -- can live and work at home if that is their intention and their desire.
 
Mr. President, the great American philosopher Henry David Thoreau said, "Things do not change.  We change."  And since your visit to us last year, Ireland has changed dramatically.  We have swapped the confines of the old fears for your audacity of hope. (Applause.)  And every day we work to create a better, more confident, more determined future.  We know our challenges are tough, but we meet those head on.
And because we know that every nation becomes what it envisions, we are forging success -- this time, a more authentic success.  We take the old advice and the old adage that in the calm ahead we use the strength of purpose that we found in the storm.
Mr. President, like you, we believe that Ireland's best days are still up ahead.  And like you, we believe that our greatest triumphs are still to come.  When you came to Ireland, like your predecessor, President Kennedy, and President Clinton, you made us dream again.  On these days of St. Patrick, we hope that you will be able to fulfill your promise to come home again in the springtime.
May God bless you, Mr. President, in the work you do for global peace and security.  May he guide you in your efforts to keep our world a safer place.
Mr. President, Michelle, and your two lovely daughters, Sasha and Malia, happy St. Patrick's Week.  (Laughter.)  And remember, as we always do:  (Speaks Irish) -- "The sun always shines after the rain."
And now it's my privilege, on behalf of Ireland, to present President Obama with the traditional Bowl of Shamrock.  May it bring him good luck in the time ahead.  (Applause.)
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, thank you.  First of all, this will have a special place of honor alongside my birth certificate.  (Laughter and applause.)  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  The shamrocks have brought good luck to our garden over the past few years.  And I am extraordinarily grateful to you, Taoiseach, and Fionnuala, for just being such wonderful hosts to us when we were there.  But I think that you get a sense from this crowd that you have a second home on the other side of the Atlantic, and that good cheer and warmth is probably reciprocated.  (Applause.)
So happy St. Patrick's Week, everybody.  God bless you.  May God bless both our countries.  Have a wonderful time while you're here.  Don't break anything.  (Laughter and applause.)
END 
7:25 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 14, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Biden, Secretary of State Clinton and British Prime Minister Cameron at an Official Luncheon
Remarks by Vice President Joseph Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton at an Official Luncheon Honoring British Prime Minister David Cameron
Benjamin Franklin Room
U.S. Department of State
1:30 P.M. EDT
SECRETARY CLINTON:  Thank you all very much.  Please be seated.  Welcome to the State Department.  We are thrilled and so pleased to host this luncheon for our very special guests, Prime Minister and Mrs. Cameron.  It is wonderful to see all of you celebrating spring with us and knowing that our relationship, it’s always spring.  It’s always being renewed, it is always durable, it is a cornerstone of both of our nations’ foreign policies, and it has such a great resonance between our two peoples. 
Now I want to recognize our chef today.  A native of Birmingham, England -– not Alabama -– (laughter) –- who made herself a home in New York City as the executive chef of a couple of very hip restaurants.  One, The Spotted Pig, the other The Breslin.  So it’s really a delight to have April Bloomfield with us.  She was just talking with the Prime Minister –- (applause) –- it was a very timely introduction because when the Prime Minister and President Obama exchanged gifts, President Obama gave the Prime Minister a barbeque.  I mean a real, down-home American barbeque with a smoking compartment and everything else.  So April stands ready to help, Prime Minister. 
We joke about the special relationship, but that’s because we’re so comfortable with it.  It means such a great deal to us.  It is not just because of a wide range of shared interests, but our deeply rooted history and the unbreakable friendship between our countries.  Now, of course the President did remind the Prime Minister at the White House ceremony this morning that we are at the 200th anniversary of the War of 1812.  (Laughter.) 
And I was pleased to tell my counterpart and friend, the Foreign Secretary, and also the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that it was my predecessor in one of my other lives, Dolly Madison, who actually saved the extraordinary portraits of George and Martha Washington.  Having received word from her husband, who was truly being a Commander-in-Chief in the field, that unfortunately the British truly were coming.  And -– (laughter) -– so she rushed from the White House, taking some treasures with her, leaving behind the meal that she had prepared for her husband and his officers.  And the British officers ate the meal before they burned the White House.  So -– (laughter) –- we are looking forward, but nevertheless, there are certain memories that are also of significance. 
And how wonderful it is, here we are today and working together in so many important parts of the world:  helping to bring peace and stability to Afghanistan; helping to promote successful transitions and democratic reforms in the Arab world.  We worked alongside each other to end a dictator’s rule in Libya.  We are now focused on helping the people of Syria realize a better future for themselves.   We are grateful for the leadership that the Prime Minister and his government have shown on so many issues -– just recently, I was in London for a conference on Somalia that they sponsored.  No matter what the issue, we are standing together.
So I know, Prime Minister and Samantha, that this is just a small measure of hospitality to try to demonstrate our commitment and appreciation for this relationship.  We were so well treated when the President and I and our teams were on a state visit last year sponsored by the government, of course, Her Majesty’s government.  So, we did the best we could with the weather.  We think we pulled that off quite well.  But it is now my great pleasure to welcome a dear friend, a great American, and a superb vice president, Joe Biden.   (Applause.)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Madam Secretary, thank you very, very much.  Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Cameron, like you we host a large number of visiting dignitaries for high-level meetings.  But sometimes they’re freighted with challenges that require us to forge whole new relationships.  And sometimes, they’re preoccupied with hammering out agreements or producing what the policy wonks refer to as ‘deliverables.’  This one is easy.  This one is easy.
Today is entirely different.  The diplomatic engagement with a full agenda of critical issues, yes, that was on -- it’s on the agenda.  But there’s also something more like a family gathering and very little disagreement.  When we sat in the Cabinet Room today, it was like a Cabinet meeting.  It wasn’t like meeting with foreign dignitaries.
And together, we have -- we, the United States and Great Britain, are very, very proud stewards of the deepest international partnership.  The bond between our countries and our people has stood the test of time and it’s grown stronger through the ravages of two world wars.  We’ve weathered ever shifting fortunes, even the political fortunes in each of our countries and nothing changes except it gets better.
So, Mr. Prime Minister, we’re deeply honored to welcome you on your first official visit to Washington.  And we’re also always anxious to welcome a British Prime Minister back to Washington, even on the anniversary of the War of 1812.  (Laughter.)
 
But I must tell you, Mr. Prime Minister -- the Secretary knows this, and a few of my friends like John Kerry know it -- in my family, it wasn’t the War of 1812 that really bothered anybody about the British.  The Bidens emigrated from Liverpool in 1825.  But the other side of the family, the Finnegan side of the family -- (laughter) -- they had a different problem and it wasn’t the War of 1812.  (Laughter.)  So my grandfather, Ambrose Finnegan, please, things have changed.  (Laughter.)  I just want you to know.  (Applause.)
Mr. Prime Minister, we are truly deeply honored that you’re here.  In your op-ed you co-authored with President Obama, you wrote, “What makes our relationship special, a unique and essential asset, is that we join hands across so many endeavors.  Put simply,” you said, “we count on each other and the world counts on our alliance.”  That is absolutely true.
The United States and the United Kingdom cooperate on a breathtaking array of issues, none more important than the six military campaigns we’ve waged alongside of one another just in the last 20 years.  As you said, the world counts on us -- it was true in Libya.  And, Mr. Prime Minister, I’d like to personally commend you for your leadership you personally showed alongside President Obama in championing the international effort to help drive Qaddafi from power and give the Libyan people a better future.
It’s true in Afghanistan as well, where 9,500 British soldiers stand shoulder to shoulder with American comrades and warriors, preparing the Afghan security forces to take responsibility for their country in 2014.  And, as the President said today in the Cabinet Room, Mr. Prime Minister, no country has made a greater sacrifice than yours in that endeavor.
And it’s true as well in the fight against al Qaeda, which has menaced both our countries.  Together, we’ve substantially degraded al Qaeda and we’ll continue to work toward its destruction, dismantlement and ultimate defeat.
 
It’s true that our efforts to strengthen the global economy after the deepest financial crisis since the Depression have been remarkable.  I remember when we first took office, within the first weeks when the G8 was meeting and then the G20 was meeting.  The question was, could we get a internationally coordinated effort?  And I remember what the President said.  He said, the Brits will be with us.  It’s an interesting comment.  We had only been in office a matter of days, if not -- it couldn’t have been more than two weeks.
And our efforts to fight hunger and disease, end famine wherever it strikes, Mr. Prime Minister, you’ve just -- you’re always there.  Your country has always been there.
 
To keep our shared sacred obligation to our military veterans and those who have served us so well, you have been a stalwart.  And we’ll see a strong symbol of that shared sacrifice when the British Wounded Warriors compete alongside American counterparts in the Wounded Warrior Games in Colorado, in May.
 
And I commend you, Mr. Prime Minister, on the new US-UK Service Personnel and Veterans Joint Task Force, which is helping our troops transition to civilian life, which has been a difficult circumstance for many of our veterans who have been deployed multiple times into God-awful circumstances.
Graham Greene, in The Quiet American, said and wrote, “Friendship is something in the soul.  It’s the thing one feels.  It’s not a return for something.”  I think that is a simple, best definition of the relationship between the United States and Great Britain.
 
So to honor our friendship, please raise your glasses when you get them.  Please raise your glasses to the Prime Minister of Great Britain, Prime Minister Cameron, to the people of the United Kingdom and the enduring, special relationship that we have between us.
(A toast is offered.)  (Applause.)
PRIME MINISTER CAMERON:  Thank you so much for those speeches and thank you for that warm welcome.  Of course, it is slightly embarrassing being here on the 200th anniversary of 1812.  And because of that, I asked a historian friend of mine, Andrew Roberts, before coming on this visit -- I said, Andrew, why is it that in Britain we don’t properly commemorate and recognize this rather embarrassing episode in our history?  And, he said, well, the thing is that of course we’re coming up to the 200th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo.  And we so much more enjoy talking about defeating the French than anything that went wrong with our American cousins.  (Laughter and applause.)
It’s great to know that there is a chef from Birmingham, England who is here cooking our meal today.  Actually, my political party did make the mistake in a recent Birmingham election of putting out a leaflet and the person who had designed the leaflet took off the Internet the scene, the city scene of Birmingham, but not being a native of Birmingham actually put in the city scene of Birmingham, Alabama on this leaflet.  (Laughter.)  And the great shock and surprise was when the city council was reelected with this leaflet.  (Laughter.)  So anything can happen in politics.
You also mentioned, Madam Secretary, the exchange of gifts between President Obama and I.  I think we’ve got it slightly wrong, because I’ve given him a table tennis table and he has given me a barbecue.  But when you see us standing next to each other, it is quite clear that the person who needs the exercise is the British Prime Minister and the person who needs the barbecue is the President of the United States.  (Laughter and applause.)
Thank you also for putting together such an amazing guest list.  We were looking through it last night -- Samantha and I -- in bed and looking through this guest list, and Samantha said, that is my favorite -- the star from my favorite movie is going to be here.  I said, my God, is it Ben Kingsley from “Gandhi?”  No, he is not coming.  Is Peter O’Toole still okay from “Lawrence of Arabia?”  Is he coming?  No.  It is Chevy Chase from “Caddyshack.”  That’s the great movie.  (Laughter.)
 
So, Mr. Vice President, Dr. Biden, Madam Secretary, Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for this wonderful reception.  Samantha and I are thrilled to be with you at the State Department and even more thrilled to be here in the Ben Franklin room.        
   
Franklin epitomizes so much of what’s good about the character of our two countries:  innovative, passionate, diligent.  He was a man who was prepared to stand up for his values and back his words with deeds.  And in the best tradition of our two nations, he was also a straight talker.  In fact he once said, guests are a bit like fish, they begin to smell after three days.  (Laughter.)  So you’ll be relieved to know having arrived yesterday, I’m leaving tomorrow.  (Laughter.)
I want to start by paying a personal tribute to Mr. Vice President, to Joe Biden, for your sustained and outstanding contribution as a legislator, as a campaigner, as a statesman.  I remember in the 1990s when you spoke out consistently for the need for military intervention to stop the ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and in Kosovo.  You were right to do that.  And in Libya, I believe we showed we’d learned the lessons.  We were able to intervene.  We were able to act and change the course of that country’s history, and we were right to do so.  So today, we applaud your vision and your courage, Mr. Vice President.  (Applause.)
Also a word of deep gratitude to you, Madam Secretary:  You’ve been a great friend to Britain for 20 years, and no one will ever forget your contribution in Northern Ireland, your incredible resilience and your conviction that peace really could be achieved after so many decades of conflict.
And I hope, Mr. Vice President, with your relatives looking down, they will see -- (laughter) -- that the relations between Britain and the Republican of Ireland have never been better.  And it’s a testament to one woman, Her Majesty the Queen, on the 60th year on the throne, that her visit to the Republic of Ireland did so much to restore relations between our countries, and we should pay tribute to her.  (Applause.)
Now, Secretary of State Hillary, in just three years you’ve visited 95 countries.  You’ve traveled over 700,000 miles.  And some people wondered how two British conservatives like William Hague and I would get along with this great force of the Democratic Party.  But as we in Britain say, quite simply, we have been bowled over.
Whenever we come together to discuss the most difficult issues, whether it’s Afghanistan, Libya, Somalia, Syria, you always speak with the greatest precision and the greatest power.  Every one of us is in awe of the passion, the intellect and the relentless energy you bring to every aspect of international affairs.  And you also bring great energy and effort to something else -- to one of the greatest pieces of unfinished business in human history, the emancipation and the empowerment of women.  (Applause.)
There are a generation of young women out there in the world today who owe you much more than they will ever know because they can live safer, more dignified, more fulfilling lives than the generations who came before them.
And you are also a great champion of smart power, and that's where I wanted to just say a word about today because after two years working hand-in-glove with the United States, I know that we’re at our best when we’re not just strong, but we are smart; when we deploy everything we have at our disposal. 
In a world of complex problems, there are no simple, easy solutions.  Take Somalia, where there is a vicious circle of state failure, economic collapse, piracy, terrorism, kidnapping, famine; as our conference in London showed last month, a credible solution cannot just be about military action or even aid in isolation.
We will only succeed when we bring together all of our military, diplomatic, economic, politic effort to achieve peace and prosperity.  And that's also why we in Britain don't just see our increased spending on aid as doing the right thing morally, although we do believe that, we also think it’s the right thing diplomatically and politically, as well.  It enhances our ability to get things done.
Now, this kind of smart power is one of the great strengths that Britain and America have in common, and I think it’s very much on show looking around this room today.
This morning, once again, young British and American men and women in uniform got up to serve together in the Persian Gulf, in Afghanistan, in the Indian Ocean; and we honor their incredible service and their sacrifice.  But we’re not just strong because of our military alone.  We’re strong too because of the power of British and American diplomacy.
As Secretary Clinton put it, the tide of war is receding, but as troops come home, civilians remain to carry out the critical missions of diplomacy and development.
Across the world our specialists are working to understand and influence other countries in shaping the big issues, including in very challenging and very dangerous locations.  Minute by minute, hour by hour, there are phone calls between London and Washington as our diplomats work together to assess the latest intelligence and work out the best ways forward.
In fact, our national security advisors last year talked so often, that I think the President was beginning to believe there was someone called Ricketts-Donilon, who was just one individual, rather than two working together.
But this is not just a security relationship; our smart power comes from more than our ability to defend our security.  It is rooted in the intertwining of two peoples and two communities.  Britain and America continually shape the world because whether you are scientists, innovators, businessmen and women, athletes or stars of fashion, art or music, all of you look across the Atlantic in both directions to find kindred spirits with the same big ideas and the same big ambitions.
So at this, the home of smart power, in the midst of this memorable visit, let me end with a tribute to all of you, to the people who day in, day out make this the essential relationship that it is today, and what it will be tomorrow and the years to come.  And let me ask all of you, please, to raise your glasses to the Vice President, Dr. Biden and the Secretary of State. 
(A toast is offered.)  (Applause.)
END
1:50 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 February 27, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden Discussing Military Spouse Employment at National Governors Association Annual Meeting
State Dining Room
10:49 A.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, David, and thank you all for coming.  It was great to see you all here last night -- what a wonderful evening.  And we're so delighted to have you here again at the White House this morning.
The last time we were together, Michelle and I talked to you about our idea for the Joining Forces initiative:  to honor, recognize and support military families.  And in this last year, we've made tremendous progress.  Since we launched Joining Forces in April, we've been so delighted by the response from Americans all over this country.  Businesses have hired tens of thousands of veterans and military spouses.  Medical schools have committed to educate their students about post-traumatic stress and traumatic brain injuries.  Schools, community organizations and Americans of every age and background have sent care packages, donated childcare, and created community celebrations for the military families in their neighborhoods.
These Americans are stepping up because they appreciate how much our military spouses and families do for our country every day.  What we have seen since launching Joining Forces has been truly gratifying, because it has shown our military families that all of us appreciate their sacrifices on their behalf.
But there is more to do.  We would like to talk to you today about one of the top concerns we hear from military spouses wherever we go:  professional licensing.  I know that many of you hear from folks in your state as well. 
A few days ago, Michelle and I went to the Pentagon to help unveil a new report from the Departments of Defense and Treasury about professional licensing for military spouses.  The report found that military spouses move 10 times more than their civilian counterparts, and that 35 percent of spouses in the workforce are in jobs that require a professional license.  Because military transfers often require spouses to move from state to state, the issue of license portability is a real challenge for military spouses.  As Michelle will discuss, there are ways we can work together to ease this burden, and we look forward to doing just that.
So thank you all for what you're doing in your home states, and please join me in welcoming my dear friend and partner in Joining Forces, First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Good morning, everyone, and welcome back.  I hope everybody got a little sleep.  (Laughter.)  Just a little bit.  But we had a terrific time last night.  And the mood was good, and hopefully you all enjoyed yourselves as well.  It's always wonderful to host you for this weekend.
I want to thank Jill, not just for her introduction but for just being a terrific partner and, more importantly, a friend over the past few years, and on this issue in particular.  As a Blue Star mom, Jill knows these issues as well as anyone.  And she has been just a terrific champion, and on ensuring that we're moving things forward.
Now, as Jill has said, this new licensing portability initiative is one of the most important and meaningful issues that we've addressed through Joining Forces.  It is the number-one frustration that Jill and I hear about every time we visit with military spouses -- and that’s really saying something.  Because the truth is, is that these women and men are facing plenty of very serious challenges in their lives.  They are raising their kids and running their household, oftentimes alone, while they have a spouse deployed.  These are the folks who are cooking those meals, they're leading the PTA, they're answering all those questions from their children about when mom or dad will be coming home.  And many of them are doing all of this while trying to hold down full-time jobs.
But the truth is that no matter what is on their plates -- and this is what always impresses us -- no matter what their country asks of them, these men and women, they never complain.  They never complain.  And I know that many of our spouses understand that when they interact with military families.  These people never ask for much.  They just keep pushing forward.
So when they do bring something to our attention, when they do come to Jill and I and they ask for our help, when they do let us know that something is a real problem for them, then we know it's serious.  We know it's time for us to take a look and figure out whether there's something that we can do.  And when you hear about how -- some of these licensing stories, what's going on, then you start to understand why they’re beginning to get frustrated.
So take the story of Kelly Crowley.  Kelly is a nurse, she’s an army wife and she’s an expectant mother.  She has been married to her husband for four years and in those four years -- and this is very typical -- Kelly has lived in three different states, which means that every year or so she’s had to gather up her college transcripts, sign and notarize a pile of documents, and pay application costs, and then wait for all of that to clear.
And she estimates that the constant moves have cost her about six months of paychecks.  Six months of paychecks from a woman who wants to work, a woman serving our country.  Six months of paychecks.  And the whole process can be so cumbersome that she’s not even sure that she’s going to go through it again for her family’s next assignment.  She’s ready to walk away from her career because the burdens are so great.
And of course this doesn’t just happen to nurses -- it is happening to teachers, it’s happening to childcare providers, accountants, real estate brokers, dental hygienists, social workers -- I mean, go on and on.  Think of the careers that require some level of licensing and these men and women are being affected.  And in total, more than 100,000 military spouses are affected by this maze of credentialing and requirements -- 100,000 men and women.  And far too often they’re forced to take entry-level classes, or pay hundreds of dollars in fees, or wait weeks or months for their paperwork to be processed all before they can even get a job; can’t even work until all this is done.
And the vast majority of these spouses are clearly qualified -- this isn’t an issue of these men and women being qualified and ready to work.  They’ve got the right skills, they’ve worked in their fields for years, many of them, but so often that doesn’t matter.  It doesn’t count.  Their skills still go unused and, more importantly, their families go without the crucial source of income that so many of them need.  Many of these families survive because they have two incomes.  And unfortunately many career ambitions are just derailed.  So, again, you can see why many of these spouses are frustrated.
Now I want to emphasize that these state standards are extremely important.  They ensure that our professionals meet a level of excellence that gives us all peace of mind when we step into a hospital or we sign our kids up for school.  So I want to be clear that we are not asking any state to change a single professional standard.  And we’re certainly not asking anyone to set a lower bar for our military spouses -- they’re the first ones who don’t want exceptions to the rule for them.  But what we are asking is for a level playing field.  We just want to make sure that these spouses have a fair shot to pursue their careers and support their families.
And of course that’s where all of you come in.  Each of you has a unique opportunity to make a real difference for these families that have given all of us so much.  Some of you have already done this -- some of you have already stepped up, including Governor Gregoire in Washington, Governor Scott in Florida, Governor Nixon in Missouri, Governor Parnell in Alaska.  In total, 12 governors have signed legislation to fix these licensing issues for military spouses, and of course we want to thank you all for leading the way.
And here’s what’s important:  Each of those 12 states found its own solution, whatever worked for them.  Some states are doing things like granting temporary licenses so that military spouses can get to work right away.  Others have given state licensing boards or agencies increased flexibility to grant licenses to military spouses who clearly demonstrate their competence.  And still others have found ways to grant licenses upon application and then verify the documentation as the spouse earns a paycheck.
And many more states are working on legislation as we speak -- California, Louisiana, Illinois and Wyoming have introduced bills in the last two weeks.  Governor Brownback just signed Kansas’ bill on Valentine’s Day, a lovely gift.  But roughly half of the country still hasn’t taken this issue on.  And that's why Jill and I are here today.
As part of Joining Forces, we have set what we hope is an ambitious but achievable goal in that, by 2014, we would love to see all 50 states having passed their own legislation to address this issues -- by 2014.  The goal is a key priority for this administration.  Secretary Panetta is behind it.  General Dempsey and all of the Joint Chiefs are behind it.  The President, of course, the Vice President -- they don't have a choice.  (Laughter.)  But they do support it.  (Laughter.)
But the people who have the biggest impact are right here in this room.  Truly, you all have the power in this instance.  No one can make a difference on this issue like all of you -- no one.  And I’m not just talking about those of you with "Governor" behind your name.  You’re really important and all, but we also have wonderful first spouses. 
I mean, just look at what First Lady Jane Beshear has done in Kentucky.  Now, Jane has formed a statewide team of military spouses who are tackling issues like education and employment in that state.  She’s worked with state higher education leaders to streamline admissions processes for military spouses.  She has testified in front of the state house.  And she has done all of this in just a year.
In fact, Jane told me that after the last governors’ spouses, she was so moved by what we had talked about that she went back to her state and she figured out exactly what she could do to push this issue ahead.
So every single person in this room has a role to play in supporting our military families.  And I am here, as well as Jill, to ask for your help -- as simple as that.  If your state has not addressed license portability for military spouses yet, today I want to ask you to make this issue a priority.  Work with the leaders in your states to get a bill introduced.  Use your bully pulpit to get it passed.  Share military spouses' stories with your local media and your state legislators. 
If you have already passed a law in your state, we encourage you to reach out to one or two of your fellow governors or spouses who are just getting started.  Share your experience.  Encourage them along the way.  Help us finish this job.  And we will be helping as much as we can.  We have a plan in place to be supportive.  Like Jill said, the report from the Department of Defense and Treasury is full of wonderful tips and best practices to help all of you find solutions that work for your state.  And that’s really the point.  There is no one-size-fits-all solution here.  And this report is really designed to offer some ideas to get things started.
Your staffs have received a copy of this report already, and all of your spouses will get one today as well.  And on top of that, the Defense Department's team of state liaisons are here to help you craft legislation, if needed, and usher it through your state houses.  In fact, we've got Ed Kringer -- Ed, where you are sitting, Ed?  Ed is here from the Department of Defense, and Ed will be available after this session to answer any questions to help get you started in the process.
And Jill and I are going to keep working, keep the light on this issue.  We're also going to be working with groups like the American Bar Association and the National Military Family Association to support your efforts at the grassroots level.  They all stand ready to try to find ways to be helpful on this issue.  So you're not in this alone.  Joining Forces has been a wonderful instrument just to raise the bar, to shine a light on these issues.  And we will continue to use this platform to be supportive and proactive.
And that’s really the thing about supporting military families that Jill and I have discovered through our work:  It is something that everyone can get behind.  It really is.  Everyone feels this, and if they don’t, they just don’t know the stories.  And once they hear the stories, they're right there.  That is what we have seen since the day we first started Joining Forces.  No matter who you are or where you come from, we are all so proud of our men and women in uniform and their families.  We all are, and we all want to do everything we can to honor and to support these men and women, and these wonderful children who are sacrificing right alongside of their parents.
And taking on this licensing issue is a perfect way to do just that.  It’s really the perfect opportunity because if we fix this, we don't just support our military spouses as they advance in their careers, which is important, but we’ll also be supporting their families who really depend on these incomes.  We will be supporting the entire military, which can more easily retain married troops if their spouses can pursue their career.  This is a retention issue.
We’ll be infusing our schools and our hospitals and our businesses with much needed, talented and experienced workers who are ready to be out there doing the job.  We will be strengthening our economy by lowering our unemployment rate and increasing our productivity by getting these hundreds of thousands of men and women into the workforce.
And you all can do all of this -- here’s the punch line -- with little or no cost.  Little or no cost.  It’s one of those things that, again, doesn't -- as other state governors will share, it doesn't have to kill the budget, and it can be done in a bipartisan way, even more importantly.  All it takes is a leader who can lead the charge for these families who serve our country so bravely.
These men and women have risked so much for all of us.  They do it for each and every one of us, and they ask so little in return, so very little.  So when they call on us, we have got a solemn obligation to answer that call.
In two years, what I hope we are able to say -- we can look these men and women in the eye and say, we heard you and we acted.  We heard you.  The one -- the few things you’ve asked for, we heard you, and we all stepped up as a nation to make it happen.  And that's really what Joining Forces is all about.
So we look forward to continuing these efforts to working with all of you in the months ahead to serve our military families as well as they serve us.  So we will be there.  We’re going to be checking in.  We’re going to nag a little bit and poke, make a few calls.  You have not heard the last of us.  (Laughter.) 
But we are excited by what this will mean to so many of these men and women.  That is the one thing we hear.  Many of them just say thank you -- thank you for recognizing that we exist and that these issues are important to us. 
So we look forward to seeing this goal achieved by 2014, and we’ll be talking to your spouses more about this shortly at lunch.
So thank you all, and take care.  (Applause.)
END
11:09 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 17, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Biden at Lunch in Honor of Vice President Xi of the People's Republic of China
J.W. Marriott
Los Angeles, California
1:00 P.M. PST
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Mayor, let me begin by thanking you for your hospitality.  It’s good to be back in Los Angeles, and I want to thank Governor Jerry Brown for hosting us as well today.
It’s an honor to join you in welcoming Vice President Xi and all of those who have traveled from China to be here, from the provinces as well as the official delegation.
I was asked today what it’s like to spend so much time with Vice President Xi, both in China and here, and I indicated then and I’ll say it again -- it’s been a great pleasure getting to know him personally.
The Vice President and I have gotten to spend more time with one another than I think either of us anticipated when both our Presidents indicated and instructed us to get to know one another better.
We had the opportunity to spend some time together last year in Italy when we both were there representing our governments to celebrate the unification of Italy at its 150th anniversary.  And the Vice President was kind enough to host me for four days in China, both in Beijing and traveling to Chengdu with me. 
And I can say with real sincerity that I’ve been looking forward to the opportunity to return the hospitality that he has shown to me, and this is the capstone to that visit with he and I here in Los Angeles.
I suspect all of you in this audience have traveled a great deal, and I must tell you, the thing I have come to admire about my colleague is his incredible physical stamina.  (Laughter.)  Since he arrived in the United States on Monday, he started off with Dr. Kissinger and Zbig Brzezinski and a number of very serious American diplomats and strategists, and the next day he spent I think 13 or 14 hours with me, starting early in the morning and going straight through to a dinner at my home with members of our Cabinet and others ending late that night.
And Governor, the next morning he left early to go to Muscatine, Iowa, and Secretary Clinton and I said, better him than us.  (Laughter.)  I think he got more delegates than either of us in Muscatine.  (Laughter and applause.)  But I must -- I’m just telling you, it’s the measure of the man.  He wanted to go back and reacquaint himself with and thank the people who had been hospitable to him 27 years earlier.
And then just to prove his stamina he came to Los Angeles, and from here he leaves from Los Angeles to Ireland on his way to Turkey.  (Laughter.)  The only place I can really help him is in Ireland.  I can get elected there.  (Laughter.) 
Mr. Vice President, you and I have spent a substantial amount of time together, and that’s fairly rare in modern diplomacy.  And let me add that we’ve all been touched -- and I mean this sincerely -- by your interest in our country, your desire to meet our people, and by the personal relationships you’re forging here.  It’s made a deep impression.
As the former governors of California are in the room, as well as the present governor can tell you, there are no people in the world that know better than the people of California, that the United States of America is a Pacific nation.
For generations, Californians have looked to the Asian-Pacific region as a critical element of their prosperity.  And now, it is critical to our efforts, all of America's efforts, to put Americans back to work and expand opportunity.
I would venture to say, if we added up the hours in the last six months, the Vice President and I have probably spent 20 hours alone in conversation.  And we've pointed out that seven of our 15 largest export markets -- America's export markets -- are in Asia, with China now the foremost among them.  Last year alone, the United States exported to China more than $100 billion worth of goods and services, supporting hundreds of thousands of American jobs.  And those jobs that are tied to exports are quality, high-paying jobs, estimated to be worth more than 15 percent more than all other jobs in America.
And Mr. Vice President, as we've discussed, the faster the U.S. economy grows, the more Chinese citizens will benefit as well.  So there is a great potential for both of us in working together to increase and solidify this relationship.  The Vice President has been straightforward in the changes he'd like to see, and I have been equally as straightforward in the changes that I'd like to -- we'd like to see in our trade and economic relationship.
The Vice President indicated that China wants to invest more in the United States.  And we're working to make that easier, and there's a whole lot of governors here who are looking forward to that.  (Laughter.)  And thanks to the great work of our ambassador, Gary Locke -- and Gary, stand up so everybody can see you.  (Applause.)  Ambassador Locke was the Secretary of Commerce, as well as the -- when he was governor of the state of Washington.  His hallmark is getting things done, and getting them done quickly.
Under the ambassador's leadership, we are now issuing more than a million visas a year -- faster than ever before -- to Chinese students, to tourists, as well as to businesspeople.  (Applause.)  I assume that came from a student.  (Laughter.)  And I've explained the things that we need to see for American companies and workers.  Here too, we're making real progress. 
We very much want to see more of our businesses able to sell their goods and services in China.  And Vice President Xi has committed to help make that possible.  In this recent visit, China has opened its market to American auto insurers and has taken concrete steps to enforce intellectual property rights, and it has plans to reform its tax system, which will help increase demand for American goods and services by lowering taxes on so-called luxury goods.
As President Obama and I have told the Vice President and all of you -- and many of you have witnessed personally -- China has made the most remarkable progress in the shortest amount of time than maybe any country in history.  And we in our administration and in this country welcome those gains.  And I think American business leaders in this room will agree that we all welcome the competition.  I know American workers welcome the competition.  It not only pushes our companies to develop better products and services and our government to craft better policies, but it encourages our workers to be more cooperative [sic] and to work even harder, increasing productivity.
But the crux of our discussions is that competition only benefits everyone if the rules to the game are fair and followed.  So we will continue to work with the Vice President and the Chinese government to make sure that everyone is playing by the same rules on a level playing field.  I strongly believe, and I think Vice President Xi does as well, that the honest, sustained dialogue we've had this week can and will build a stronger relationship that benefits both our nations and our people. 
And ladies and gentlemen, it is now my great pleasure to introduce to you the Vice President of China, a man you are going to learn a great deal more about for a good number of years, ladies and gentlemen, my friend, Vice President Xi.  (Applause.)
END
1:15 P.M. PST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 February 15, 2012
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden On Military Spouse Licensing
The Pentagon
3:27 P.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Hello.  Thank you, Secretary Panetta and Deputy Secretary Wolin for your leadership.  Thank you, General Dempsey, for your kind introduction.  Good afternoon, Deanie, and all the Joint Chiefs and your spouses.  Thank you for being such great partners to Michelle and me.
I want to offer a special welcome to all of our service members and their spouses.  We are honored to be with you today.
 
Many of you know, as the General mentioned, that I am a proud military mom.  One of the best parts of my role as Second Lady is the privilege of meeting with service members and their families all over the world.  I am always amazed at their courage, their determination and their resilience.  That inspiration is one of the main reasons the First Lady and I started Joining Forces so that all Americans are helping to support our military families.
We’ve seen Americans step up in so many ways.  We’ve seen businesses hiring tens of thousands of veterans and military spouses -- businesses like Sears, Kmart and Sam’s Club have made commitments to hire military spouses or make base transfers easier.  Medical schools have committed to educate their students about post-traumatic stress and traumatic brain injuries and conduct new research on these conditions.  Schools, community organizations and Americans of every age and background have sent care packages, donated childcare and created community celebrations for the military families in their neighborhoods.
And Americans are stepping up because they know how much our military spouses and families have done for our country.  People like Ann Wells.  Ann’s husband, Robert, is career combat engineer and command service sergeant major.  After 10 years of marriage, Ann went back to school for her nursing degree.
As a teacher, I have had the privilege of teaching countless women like Ann, women who fight hard for a good education.  But like so many military spouses, Ann moved frequently with her husband and that often meant a new license was required to pursue her nursing career in Hawaii, in Tennessee, in Texas and in Missouri.  That's why our efforts here today are so important.  They are another way we can show our support for those who serve this country.
Please join me in welcoming Ann.  (Applause.)
* * * * *
MRS. OBAMA:  Someone can give an order to be seated.  There are plenty of people here who can do that, correct?  (Laughter.)  But thank you for that wonderful welcome.  And thank you, Ann.  Thank you for the kind introduction and for all that you and your family have done for our country. 
I also want to thank Secretary Panetta for hosting us here at the Pentagon.  And of course, I have to thank Jill, who has been such a wonderful friend and such a terrific partner in Joining Forces.
I also want to join in recognizing General Dempsey and his wife, Jeannie -- Deanie, why am I saying Jeannie?
Hi, Deanie.  How are you?  (Laughter.)  Thank you.  You’ve been amazing.  You’ve helped us through.  You’ve kept us on the straight and narrow along with all of the other spouses of the Joint Chiefs.  You all have been just amazing supports.  And I also have to recognize the Joint Chiefs as well.  Thank you all.  You all have been so steadfast, just right there every step of the way.  We are just proud of everything that you do for this country.
And we also have Deputy Secretary Neal Wolin, who is here from the Department of Treasury, who has put so much time and effort into helping prepare this report.  We wouldn’t be here today without all that you have done, so thank you.  Well done.  Job well done.  Absolutely.
(Applause.)
We also have Alan Krueger, who’s the Chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisors; of course, the First Lady of Kentucky, Jane Beshear, who has been really doing some phenomenal work in her state and taking the lead and stepping up in ways big and small.  We really are grateful to everything that you’ve done.  We also have members of Congress here, we have state legislators, and we representatives from many of our nation’s veterans service organizations who are here with us. 
And we are all here today, we have all gathered, to say this to America’s military families:  We are incredibly grateful for your service.  We understand the unique challenges that you face; and we are going to do everything that we can to make sure that you can pursue your careers and provide for your families. 
Now as Jill said, over the past few years, she and I have had the privilege of visiting with military spouses all across the country.  And as Jill said, you all are some of the most courageous, resilient, and inspiring people that we have ever met.  You all are the ones who keep your families together when your spouse is deployed.  You’re the parents who turn off the news at night for fear of what you  might hear, who answer all those questions about why Mom or Dad has been gone for so long.
You’re the spouse who steps up to do the work of two parents, raising the kids, running the household, juggling all the errands and chores all alone.  But you are still the volunteer on the PTA.   You still lead that food drive.  You organize the neighborhood carpool.  You’re the families who, every few years, you pack up your entire lives, and you move whenever and wherever your country calls.
But no matter how much is on your plate, no matter what this country asks of you, you all just keep moving forward.  You just keep serving your families, your communities and your country in ways that many of us cannot fathom.
But when it comes to moving forward in your own careers, when it comes to getting a job and being able to provide for your families when you arrive at that new base or duty station, far too often, you can't just keep moving because you’ve run into a brick wall.
It happens to military spouses again and again.  You’re asked to move to a new state.  You want to get back to the job you love and the job you need to support your family.  But you can’t do any of that because your nursing license or your teaching credentials don’t transfer when you move to a new state.
 
It happens to nurses like Ann.  It happens to school teachers, to childcare providers, to accountants, real estate brokers, dental hygienists, lawyers too -- that's supposed to be funny.  No one likes lawyers.  (Laughter.)  And so many other careers.  We have learned that more than one of every three military spouses in the labor force have jobs that require some kind of professional license or certification.  So this licensing issue affects more than 100,000 individuals -- 100,000 individuals.  And the vast majority of you are clearly ready to work when you get to your new state.
You’ve already demonstrated your specialized skills.  You’ve already gained years of professional experience.  But too often, as Ann said, you’re left waiting for paperwork to clear while your skills go unused and more importantly your family’s bank accounts shrink.  And this is something Jill and I hear about on every single base and in every single military community that we visit.  It is the number one issue that military spouses tell us about.
And we know that this is a challenge for these families because the one important thing that I have learned about military spouses is they never complain.  They never ever ask for anything. 
So on the rare occasion when our military spouses do speak up and ask for our help, then it’s time for all of us to take action.  And that’s what today’s report from the Departments of Defense and Treasury is all about.  That's what we’re doing.  We’re all taking action.  We’ve heard your frustrations, and we’re finding solutions. 
And that starts by first recognizing how these issues arise.  Now, each state issues its own professional license and sets its own standards of professional competence.  Take teachers, for example.  To earn a teaching license, states ask for some combination of state and national test scores, supervised work experience, and advanced coursework.  But when you analyze requirements like these across several states, you begin to understand the challenges that arise for military spouses.
In some states, for example, applicants are required to take an entry-level course in state history or other subjects before the licensing board will grant a license.  So if you’re a military spouse with years of teaching experience and you move across state lines, you could end up taking extra classes for weeks on end before you can even get a job, and that’s just what happens in one profession. 
When you’re talking about dozens of careers, the web of requirements and standards can get pretty thick.  But before we go any further, let me be very clear:  We’re not asking any state to change their standards.  These state rules are important, and states have every right to set benchmarks just like these.  In doing so, they hold our professionals to a high bar and they give us all peace of mind whenever we walk into a hospital or enroll our kids in school.
But it’s also clear that this system poses very unique challenges for our military families.  And recently, a number of states have stepped forward to address this very problem.
So let me just tell you about what just some of a few states are already doing.  In Tennessee, they’re granting temporary licenses in many professions, which will allow spouses to get a job first, then complete any remaining state licensing requirements.  In Colorado, the director of their state licensing agency now has the power to waive cumbersome requirements for military spouses who clearly demonstrate their competence.  And then in Arizona, they passed legislation to grant licenses, in most professions, to military spouses who have at least one year of experience.
So that’s three states with three different solutions.  In each of them, military spouses with professional skills and experience don’t have to wait before they get to work.  If they need to complete any remaining requirements in their new state, they can do it as they earn a paycheck. 
And that’s the general guideline that eight other states have followed as they’ve created laws of their own.  And we’re pleased that 13 more states have legislation pending or waiting to be introduced.  But that still leaves 26 states -– that still leaves more than half the country –- that have yet to address this issue.
And, again, that’s where this report comes in.  We know that there’s no one-size-fits-all solution here.  Every state is different.  So this report simply provides a roadmap of best practices that leaders across the country can use as a resource as they explore ways that their state can better support these military families.
The report contains tips and ideas, not edicts and decrees.  But the point is that there are solutions here.  This is a solvable problem.  So today we are setting a national goal -– by the year 2014, we want all 50 states to have passed their own legislation to address these licensing issues.
And we know it’s an ambitious goal.  We know it won’t be easy to achieve, but we also know that our nation’s military families have waited long enough.  (Applause.)
And it’s also important to note that this isn’t just about military spouses.  This issue affects our troops.  It affects our military children, all of whom are relying on the income of these spouses earn.  This affects our schools and our hospitals and our businesses that need those skilled employees.  And all of that affects our entire economy -– our unemployment rate, our productivity, our competitiveness all around the world.
So it’s time for us to come together as a country to find some solutions to this problem that has affected so many of our military families for so long.  It is time for us to make sure that our military spouses, that their hard work and professional skills are recognized, no matter what state they move to.
And we’re all willing to do our part to work together to move this issue forward and to provide support for states along the way.  That’s why, in addition to today’s announcement, when our nation’s governors gather at the White House in just two weeks, Jill and I are going to make this ask directly. 
We’re going to ask each of the governors to lead the charge on this issue in their state.  We’re also going to reach out to state legislators across the country, and we’re going to ask them to jumpstart the legislative process.  The state liaisons here at the Department of Defense will be working nonstop to help these state leaders craft and pass bills that fit their states’ needs.
In addition, we’re going to be asking advocacy groups like the National Military Family Association to engage at a state level to build the kind of grassroots support that will help get this done.  And we’re going to urge more national professional organizations to follow the lead of the American Bar Association, which actively is encouraging its state affiliates to make licensing accommodations for military spouses.
So we are ready to roll up our sleeves and do some heavy lifting on this issue.  We are ready to make this happen.  And if we can do this, if we can work together so that every state can find its own solution, we’ll once again show all of you –- our incredible military families –- that America has your back.
After all, that’s exactly what you do for all of us every single day.  That's what you do for us.  No matter how much we ask of you, no matter what the personal cost, our military families always answer the call.  They always do.
And today, as we announce this new effort, I’m reminded of a group of military spouses that I met with a few years ago in Kentucky.  One woman we were talking to, she choked up as she told me about some of the challenges that she and her family were facing.  And I’ll never forget what happened next: another military spouse who was sitting there, she jumped in and she said -- and this is a quote -- she said, “I don’t know this woman.  I didn’t meet her before today, but when she leaves here, she will have my number.  And she will be able to call me anytime.  She’s got the support of this friend right here.”
See and I tell that story because that's who military spouses are.  That's exactly who they are.  That’s the life that so many of you here today lead.  That is the commitment that you show every single day to your families, to our communities and to our country.   And I just want you all to know that you can call on us, and we will answer.  We owe it to you and your families who have sacrificed so much.
And so to all of the state leaders out there, in this room and beyond, I want to thank you for everything that you’ve done so far, and I look forward to working with you to finish this job.
And to our troops and our military families, I cannot thank you enough for everything you do for this country. 
We are inspired by you.  We are so proud of you, and we are working as hard as we can to serve you as well as you have served this country.
Thank you and, God bless, and God bless the United States of America.  Thanks, so much.  (Applause.)
END
3:50 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 14, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Chinese Vice President Xi to US and China CEOs
4:50 P.M. EST

        VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you for the hospitality here at the chamber, Tom.  I appreciate it very much, and thank all of you at the chamber and from the U.S.-China Business Council hosting this event; and a warm welcome to Vice President Xi and the Chinese delegation.

        I indicated as -- the entry hall that we’ve not -- I’ve not been a very good host thus far.  Vice President Xi arrived yesterday, and we’ve had him going since 8:30 this morning, meeting after meeting.  He just returned from the Pentagon.  And immediately Tom Donohue said, well, don't forget, Joe, he’s much younger than we are.  (Laughter.)  

        We’re joined by so many distinguished business leaders, and this indicates at least two things, Mr. Vice President, they're honored to have you here as our guest and, secondly, how important they feel and we feel -- U.S.-China economic and trade relationships are for both our nations.  And as you and I have discussed in the past, Mr. Vice President, we presume as well to think they're important for the world at large.

        In this area, as in many others, we’re working together to an unprecedented degree.  Let me be clear:  I believe, as the President said also to the Vice President in the Oval Office not long ago, we believe that a rising China is a positive development -- not only for China but also for the United States and the world.  It will fuel economic growth and prosperity, and a rising China will bring to the fore a new partner with whom we can have help meeting the global challenges we all face.

        Even as our nations cooperate, though, as the Vice President point out, we will continue to compete.  As Americans, we welcome this competition.  I’ve said to the Vice President before, it’s part of our DNA.  And it pushes our companies to develop better products and services and our government to craft better policies.

        But competition can only be mutually beneficial if the rules of the game are understood, agreed upon and followed.  I’m pleased that we have made progress in areas of concern.  China’s exchange rate is appreciating, though still substantially undervalued in our view.  China has committed to rebalance its economy and has just informed us that it will move forward this year with a tax reform policy that will increase imports and promote consumption.

        China has also just told us that it will open third-party liability auto insurance market to foreign companies, an important step in the reforming of the financial sector.  

        And China has responded to our concerns about procurement policies and established a high-level body to strengthen enforcement of intellectual property rights as well.  

        For our part, the U.S. is working to be responsive to Chinese concerns as well.  For example, the United States is expending our visa processing capacity in China to help reduce delays and encourage Chinese travel to the United States.

        But I’m sure, as the Vice President will be the first to tell you, we have work to do -- especially on issues like discriminatory subsidies and financing, protecting intellectual property and trade secrets and ending the practice of making the transfer of technology a requirement for doing business.

        The United States will also work to ensure that all countries play by the international rules.  We’ve brought cases that have challenged unfair trade practices, and we’ve defended U.S. producers and workers in many arenas.

        And in last months, State of the Union address, President Obama announced further steps to investigate and challenge unfair trading practices, protect our markets from counterfeit and unsafe goods and level the financial playing field for our companies.

        I look forward to hearing from those of you gathered here today about both the benefits -- and there are many -- and the challenges of doing business in China, as well as about your plans here and their plans here in the United States.  We welcome your suggestions as to how our governments can address the difficulties you face.

        And I want to thank you again, Tom, for your hospitality and thank all of your colleagues for joining us, and I look forward to our discussions.

        Mr. Vice President.

        VICE PRESIDENT XI:  (As interpreted.)  Vice President Biden, President Donahue, Chairman Muhtar Kent, Chairman Wan Jifei, business representatives to both China and the United States, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends it gives me great pleasure to attend this business roundtable in Washington D.C., together with Vice President Biden.

        I wish to thank the CCPIT, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the U.S.-China Business Council for their careful organization, and business leaders of both countries for their active participation.  The 20-plus business leaders from China and the United States present today include representatives both of the rural economy, financial sector, the traditional manufacturing industry and emerging industries.  They represent both state-owned enterprises and private companies.

        The broad and active participation of business people in both countries has made the comprehensive, mutually complimentary, and win-win China-U.S. economic relationship more colorful and more dynamic.  The purpose of my current visit to the United States at the invitation of Vice President Biden is to implement the important agreement of the two Presidents and advance the China-U.S. cooperative partnership.

        This morning, I met with President Obama and held talks with Vice President Biden.  During these meetings, we had in-depth and candid exchange of views on China-U.S. relations and major international and regional issues of shared concern.  We reached a new and important agreement that will help us enhance mutual trust, increase mutual understanding, and generate win-win outcomes.

        We had an in-depth exchange of views on economic and trade issues.  We agree that China-U.S. economic relationship is highly mutually complimentary and full of dynamism.  The two sides should quicken our steps to build a comprehensive and mutually beneficial economic partnership, advance the investment and trade package plan on cooperation, address economic frictions through dialogue and cooperation instead of by protectionist means so as to promote a steady recovery and growth of the two economies and the world economy as a whole.

        With regard to the U.S. concerns concerning trade imbalance, IPR protection, indigenous innovation and investment environment, the Chinese side has taken steps to address them and will continue to do so.  We hope that the U.S. side will adopt the same positive attitude and take credible steps as soon as possible to address Chinese concerns on lifting restrictions on high-tech exports to China and providing a level playing field for Chinese companies investing in America.

        Since the normalization of China-U.S. relations, business people of the two countries have worked together to make progress.  What they have done has made important contribution to China-U.S. economic cooperation and overall China-U.S. relationship.  In the process, they have shared development opportunities and reaped handsome profits.  This is a true example of one reaps what he has sown.

        Given the growing uncertainties and instability in world economic recovery, there has become an even more pressing need for China and the United States, and our businesses, to strengthen cooperation.  In August last year, in Beijing, Vice President Biden and I attended a business forum.  And today, once again, we are having this face-to-face interaction with business representatives of both countries.

        In doing so, we want to increase and expand China-U.S. economic and trade cooperation and bring it to a higher level, to the greater benefit of the two peoples.  To achieve this end, I would like to share with you some of my observations.  First, the British thinker Francis Bacon said, “The ripeness or un-ripeness of the occasion must ever be weighed.”

        At present, both China and the United States are at a critical juncture of shifting growth models.  China is implementing its 12th Five-Year Plan with focus on expanding consumption, upgrading service sector, and encouraging Chinese companies to go global, while the United States is implementing the National Export Initiative, investing in America and programs with focus on expanding exports, boosting the manufacturing sector, and inviting in foreign companies.

        The economic agendas of the two countries have a lot to offer to each other and there is space for our cooperation in energy, environmental protection, biomedicine, advanced manufacturing and infrastructure.  I hope business people of the two countries will follow their trend to seize the opportunities and translate potentials into real win-win outcomes.

        Second, range far your eye over long vistas.  We should adopt a long-term perspective and have broad vision.  The vision of an entrepreneur decides his strategy, his actions decide his attainments.  I hope business people will not let the drifting clouds block their views, will not allow their hands to be tied by some temporary disturbances.  Instead, I hope they will develop more and better products and services.  Here I wish to congratulate General Motors for becoming world champion in car sales last year.

        As far as I know, the SAIC-GM, a joint venture of SAIC and GM now produces and sells 1.2 million cars every year.  For two consecutive years, GM sales in China has exceeded its sales in the States.  Last year, the urbanization rate of China reached 51.2 percent with urban population totaling 690 million.  With the continued process of urbanization, it is estimated that by 2015 the total retail sales of consumer goods in China will reach 32 trillion RMB.

        During the 12th Five Year Plan period, China will import over $8 trillion U.S. worth of commodities.  Such a huge Chinese domestic market offers broad space for mutually beneficial cooperation between Chinese and American business communities.  We welcome more American companies to make investment in China.

        Third, to strengthen the role of China-U.S. economic relationship as the ballast and propeller in our bilateral relationship -- those two metaphors of ballast and propeller shows how much weight our economic relationship carries and as that it serves a strong, driving force.

        Last year, our bilateral trade hit a record high of $446.6 billion U.S., an increase of 16 percent on year-on-year basis.  At this rate, it is expected to top $500 billion U.S.  I hope business communities and chambers of commerce in both countries will continue to care about support and take part in China-U.S. economic cooperation, present a true picture of mutually beneficial China-U.S. economic relationship to the governments and the people, oppose protectionism, and more vocally effectively prevent politicizing economic issues and avoid various kinds of undue interference so as to uphold to the overall interests of China-U.S. relationship and bilateral relationship.

        Fourth, running business conscientiously, honestly fulfill corporate social responsibility.  Both Chinese and American business people should come to realize that only with credibility a company can win a good reputation.

        I’m happy to learn that Chinese Wanxiang Group in recent years has purchased some bankrupt American enterprises that has helped to keep more than 3,500 jobs for local people.  And the Tianjin Pipe Corporation of China invested $1 billion U.S. in the state of Texas, creating 800 jobs for local people.  I am also happy to learn that some of the American companies represented here have taken active parts in poverty alleviation and scholarship programs.  All these have demonstrated the strong sense of social responsibility and morals of Chinese and American business people.

        I hope while expanding your business, you will further reward the local community, creating jobs for local people, increasing revenues for local governments and taking part in the public welfare and community development projects, so that our two people benefit more from China-U.S. economic cooperation.

        Ladies and gentlemen, American writer Edward Bellamy said, “The Golden Age is before us, not behind us.”  Looking ahead to 2012 and even longer time to come, I’m fully confident that the Chinese economy will maintain steady and fast development; that the U.S. economy will achieve strong recovery and growth, and that China-U.S. economic cooperation has a bright future.

        I sincerely hope that business people of the two countries will seize the opportunity and strive for greater progress and write more success stories in China-U.S. economic cooperation.  I thank you.  (Applause.)

END 5:08 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 14, 2012
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Chinese Vice President Xi at the State Department Luncheon
1:30 P.M. EST

        VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you all for being here.  And it’s an honor to welcome Vice President Xi, along with the entire Chinese delegation.

        I told Vice President Xi, his visit to Iowa tomorrow will assure him more delegates than I got the last time I was there.  (Laughter.)  And, Mr. Vice President, this is not part of the script, but Lindsey Graham is relieved you didn’t show up in January.  You may have won the Republican nomination.  (Laughter.)  Secretary Kissinger, you can see formality is still my forte.  (Laughter.)

        Madam Secretary, this lunch is a great start.  I hope we can match the extraordinary hospitality that the Vice President showed me in my four-day visit to China last August.

        The highlight of that trip for me, Mr. Vice President, was the time we spent in conversation together in Beijing, in Chengdu, and I look forward to continuing the conversations we started this morning over the next four days you’re here.

        The Vice President has already participated in three meetings prior to this lunch and they’ve covered a broad range of constructive discussions, and we have a very ambitious agenda in the coming days as well.

        As the Vice President and I have discussed at some length, the United States and China have much to do together, quite frankly, because our relationship is literally going to help shape the 21st century.  We’re not only the two -- the world’s two largest economies, we’re both Pacific powers.  And every day the affairs of our nations and the livelihoods of our citizens grow more connected.

        The President and I came to office determined to rebalance America’s strategic priorities toward those regions that are most critical to our nation’s future, and that meant refocusing on Asia, the most dynamic region of the global economy.  And to state the obvious, the U.S.-China relationship is a critical component of our broader Asian strategy.  Our people, both American and Chinese, are indeed people -- quite frankly, people all around the world will benefit from this mutual effort to build a more cooperative partnership between our countries.

        I first visited China in 1979, and the prosperity achieved since then, which I saw as recently as this past August is -- as all of you know who visit it -- stunning, absolutely stunning.  Few other nations in history have come so far, so fast, and it’s a great credit to the talent and industriousness of the Chinese people.

        But I respectfully suggest that this remarkable growth did not occur in a vacuum.  It was cultivated at every turn by an international system that enables rapid development grounded in rules that apply with equal measure to all nations.  Mr. Vice President, even as our cooperation grows, as we’ve discussed, the United States and China will continue to compete.  And, as Americans, we welcome competition.  It’s part of our DNA and it propels our citizens to rise to the challenge.

        But cooperation, as you and I have spoken about, can only be mutually beneficial if the game is fair.  That’s why in -- the meetings we’ve had this morning were essentially a continuation of the multiple meetings we had in your country in August, and we spent a great deal of time discussing the areas of our greatest concern, including the need to rebalance the global economy, to protect intellectual property rights and trade secrets, to address China’s undervalued exchange rate, to level the competitive playing field and to prevent the forced transfer of technology, and to continue a constructive dialogue on policies that would benefit our citizens and the world.

        While the United States and China -- as you have pointed out, Mr. Vice President -- will not always see eye to eye, it is a sign of the strength and maturity of our relationship that we can be candid about our differences as we have been.  We saw this in the recent U.N. Security Council debate about Syria, where we strongly disagreed with China and Russia’s veto of a resolution against the unconscionable violence being perpetrated by the Assad regime.

        And as was brought up by the President in his meeting with you and my meeting with you as well, we see our advocacy for human rights as a fundamental aspect of our foreign policy and we believe a key to the prosperity and stability of all societies.  We have been clear about our concern over the areas in which from our perspective conditions in China have deteriorated and about the plight of several very prominent individuals.  And we appreciate your response.

        Despite our differences, China and the United States are working more closely together on a broader range of issues than ever before.  These include pressing security challenges North Korea and Iran, maritime security, cyber security and the important work of developing cooperation between our militaries.

        As you and the President briefly discussed in the Oval Office, it also includes our efforts in Sudan and in South Asia, and on global issues such as climate change and nuclear security.  We appreciate your candid responses as we discuss these issues, Mr. Vice President, and I believe you appreciate ours as well.

        So, Mr. Vice President, once again welcome to the United States.  I’ve always believed that the best way -- sometimes, the only way -- to truly understand a country is to see it with your own eyes.  As you know, there’s an old Chinese saying, better to travel 10,000 miles than read 10,000 books.  Although I read Dr. Kissinger’s book on China, I felt that my trip to your country was at least as important last summer.  (Laughter.)

        Actually, Mr. Vice President, I can’t thank you enough for the hospitality you extended to me in my trip.  And I would like to, with your permission, propose a toast -- a toast to a successful visit for the Vice President and the increasing cooperation and understanding that will help both our nations continue to increase this relationship and may it benefit not only us, but the whole world.

        Mr. Vice President.  (Applause.)  

        (A toast was offered.)

        VICE PRESIDENT XI:  (As interpreted)  Mr. Vice President, Madam Secretary, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, it gives me great pleasure to attend this luncheon hosted jointly by Vice President Biden and Secretary Clinton, for me and my colleagues.

        Last August, Vice President Biden paid a successful visit to China.  I’m now in the United States on a return visit at his kind invitation.  The purpose of my visit is to implement the agreement between our two presidents, enhance China-U.S. strategic trust, broaden practical cooperation, deepen people-to-people friendship, and further advance the cooperative partnership between our two countries.


        This year marks the 40th anniversary of President Nixon’s visit to China and the issuance of the Shanghai Communique.  Forty years ago, with the extraordinary courage and vision of statesmen, the leaders of our two countries opened the door of China-U.S. exchanges that had been sealed off for years.

        Despite some twists and turns over the past four decades, China-U.S. relations have kept moving forward, scoring achievements of historic proportions.  The growth of China-U.S. relations has brought huge benefits to the two countries and two peoples, and lent a strong impetus to peace, stability, and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region and the world at large.  The China-U.S. relationship has become one of the most important, dynamic, and promising bilateral relationships in the world.  

        As the saying goes, when you drink water, don’t forget those who dug the well.  Today, when we enjoy the fruit of China-U.S. relations, we should be grateful to the generations of Chinese and American leaders for their outstanding contribution to the new chapter in the annals of China-U.S. relations.  We should also be grateful to the Chinese and American friends from various sectors, including many who are present today, for the painstaking and resourceful efforts they have made for the development of China-U.S. relations.

        In the past three years during the Obama administration, China-U.S. relations have, on the whole, maintained positive momentum of growth.  In January last year, President Hu Jintao paid a visit to the United States.  He and President Obama reached an important agreement on working together to build a China-U.S. cooperative partnership based on mutual respect and mutual benefit, charting the course for the long-term development of China-U.S. relations.  We are glad to see that the two countries have further deepened practical cooperation in a wide array of areas and carried out productive communication and coordination on a range of major international, regional, and global issues.  

        This morning, I had a meeting with President Obama and held talks with Vice President Biden at the White House.  We had an in-depth exchange of views on bilateral relations and major issues of shared interest and reached a lot of new and important consensus.  We all believe that the two sides should focus on our common interests and open a new path of cooperative partnership between major countries featuring harmonious coexistence, sound interactions and win-win cooperation.  To this end, our two sides should treat each other with sincerity and candor and enhanced dialogue and communication.  We should respect each other and strengthen strategic, mutual trust.  We should keep pace with the times and expand practical cooperation.  We should look ahead to the future and step up people-to-people exchanges.  And we should intensify coordination and work together to meet challenges.

        President Obama, Vice President Biden and I devoted the greater part of our discussion on economic and trade issues.  We share the view that as the international economic and financial situation remains grim and as ensuring growth, adjusting structure, and promoting employment are high on the domestic agenda of both countries, we must continue to make concerted efforts to tide over difficulties, accelerate the building of the comprehensive and the mutually beneficial economic partnership, and maintain steady economic recovery and growth in both countries and the world as a whole.

        We should tap our cooperation potential, create more bright spots in our cooperation, and strive for greater balance in trade and investment between the two countries.  We should address each other’s economic and trade concerns through dialogue and consultation, not protectionism, and uphold the mutually beneficial pattern of China-U.S. economic relations and trade.  

        We also had a candid exchange of views on human rights and other issues.  I stressed that China has made tremendous and well-recognized achievements in the field of human rights over the past 30 plus years since reform and opening up.  Of course, there is always room for improvement when it comes to human rights.  Given China’s huge population, considerable regional diversity, and uneven development, we’re still faced with many challenges in improving people’s livelihood and advancing human rights.  

        The Chinese Government will always put people’s interests first and take seriously people’s aspirations and demands.  We will, in the light of China’s national conditions, continue to take concrete and effective policies and measures to promote social fairness, justice and harmony, and push forward China’s course of human rights.

        At the same time, we’re ready to conduct candid and constructive dialogue and exchanges on human rights with the United States and other countries on the basis of equality and mutual respect, with a view to enhancing understanding, narrowing differences, learning from each other, and achieving common progress.

        China is the world’s largest developing country, while the United States is the largest developed country.  To build a new type of cooperative partnership between two countries like ours is a pioneering endeavor with great and far-reaching significance.  There is no precedent for us to follow and no ready experience for us to refer to.  We can only do what Mr. Deng Xiaoping said, “Cross the river by feeling the stones.”  Or what Secretary Clinton one quoted:  “When confronted by mountains, one finds a way through.  When blocked by a river, one finds a way to bridge to the other side.”  A Chinese pop song goes like this:  “May I ask where the path is?  It is where you take your first step.”

        I’m convinced that China and the United States have the wisdom, ability and means to maintain and develop their cooperative partnership based on mutual respect and mutual benefit.  And by doing so, we’ll set an unprecedented and inspiring example for countries with different political systems, histories, cultures, and levels of economic development to cultivate positive and cooperative relations.

        I now propose a toast to the health of Vice President Biden and Secretary Clinton, and that of all the friends present, to the remarkable development of China-U.S. relations in the past 40 years and to make even better tomorrow of China-U.S. relations.  Cheers.

        (A toast was offered.)  (Applause.)

END 2:03 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 12, 2011
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at the Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence Awards, As Prepared for Delivery
Good afternoon, everyone.  Thank you, Angie, for your kind introduction.  I always say that I admire my students and you are a perfect example of some of the amazing people who not only choose community college, but excel there. 
First of all:  Congratulations to all the Aspen Prize finalists!  Today is a celebration of all of you and of the important role your schools play in our country. 
On behalf of everyone who believes in the promise of education to change lives, thank you for what you do.
I would like to thank Secretary Duncan for his leadership and my friend Martha Kanter for all her work.  We couldn’t have stronger community college advocates in the Department of Education than Arne and Martha.  It was just over a year ago that we gathered at the first-ever White House Summit on Community Colleges to share ideas about improving student outcomes. 
That summit showed what we all already knew:  that community colleges are the best kept secret in America. That morning, we announced the Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence. Each of us in this room – students, educators, administrators, experts – knows that excellence happens every day in community college classrooms and campuses across this country.  Student by student….classroom by classroom…paper by paper…you educate…you inspire…you change lives.
The Aspen Prize gives us an opportunity to celebrate community college excellence on a grand scale.  So, thank you to the Aspen Institute, the supporters, and the many people who worked so hard to get to this day.  You have helped these institutions get the recognition they deserve.As I said in October, the summit was an important step in our efforts to meet the President’s goal of having the best-educated, most competitive workforce in the world.  But, I said then that we still had a lot of work to do. So much has been done since then.  On Summit Day, we announced Skills for America’s Future, an initiative to create industry-led partnerships with community colleges. 
Since then, Skills for America’s Future has partnered with companies and community colleges across the country to help students acquire important job skills.  Together, these partners are training hundreds of thousands of community college students for the jobs of today and tomorrow.
Immediately after the summit, the Aspen team began its rigorous process culminating in today’s announcement.  The work you have done has the potential to shape policy in the years to come. 
As a teacher, I am fortunate to be in the classroom every week and able to see firsthand the tremendous impact community colleges have on so many students. 
These schools represent an idea that is uniquely ours – if you work hard and get a good education, you can build a better life for you and your family.  And community colleges make that happen, every day. 
We see it in the moms who go back to school for more specific training … in the military veterans returning from service who come back to complete their degrees … and in the high school graduates who continue their education.
We see it in students like Angie – who never thought college was an option.  But, since she found a home at a community college, she hasn’t let anything stop her. 
She’s not just changing her own life, but she is giving back to her community–– serving in student government, tutoring other students, and pursuing her dream of becoming a teacher.
I know all the prize finalists represented here today are as inspired by their students as I am by mine. 
Congratulations to Valencia College – and to all the finalists – on this tremendous achievement.  Your commitment to your students is an inspiration to all of us.
Early next year, I look forward to touring a number of community colleges.  I will highlight more of the innovative job partnerships and student support programs that are really making a difference in peoples’ lives. We will keep our eyes on the important work of community college innovators across the country.
Because as we look to the future, something is becoming more and more clear:  community colleges aren’t just changing lives; they’re changing America.  Community colleges have taken their place alongside our great four-year universities in the battle to compete and win in the 21st century. 
So we need to be ready for this challenge. Because the future we want isn’t going to be built without us.  I look forward to continuing to work with all of you in the coming months. Thank you again for all of your hard work, and congratulations.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 05, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Greek Prime Minister Papademos at a Lunch Meeting
Prime Minister’s Office
Athens, Greece
 
12:06 P.M. (Local)
 
PRIME MINISTER PAPADEMOS:  (Opening remarks offered in Greek not translated.)
 
Now in today’s meeting, we will have the opportunity to have substantive and productive discussions on important issues of mutual interest, and also we’ll have an opportunity to explore on how we can further strengthen cooperation in the two countries.  We will discuss how we can foster the economic relations between the two countries and also the economic process we being implemented in Greece in order to address the economic challenges we are facing.
 
We will also have an exchange of views on major international and regional issues and on cooperative efforts in these -- and special attention will be paid on developments in Cyprus, the distant Mediterranean, Northern Africa, as well as the Balkans.  These are areas where cooperation between the U.S. and Greece can play an important role in preserving stability and security. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Vice President, for meeting with me.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  On behalf of the President who -- I know you’ve already spoken to President Obama -- I am here to tell you that we stand with you in solidarity as you meet some very difficult requirements of the IMF and the European Union in this difficult time for Greece.  And we stand prepared to help you in any way we can. 
 
As you pointed out, Mr. Prime Minister, we have been friends for a long time.  We share the same value set.  We’re NATO allies, and it is overwhelmingly in the interest of the United States that Greece work its way through this financial crisis and that it remain a strong and vital part of the European Union.
 
You have a difficult job, but it appears as though all the political parties and the people of Greece have agreed to support you in this difficult time.  And we are pleased with that.
 
But we have many other things in common and many other mutual concerns, and we will discuss them ranging from the Aegean, to the Balkans, to the Middle East, to North Africa and Cyprus. 
And I think that out of difficult times opportunities present themselves.  And with a lot of hard work and a little bit of luck a year from now, we will have not only weathered this crisis but even be in a stronger position.  So let’s get to work.  (Laughter.)
 
END
12:12 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 03, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joseph Biden at the Entrepreneurship Summit
Istanbul, Turkey
11:45 A.M. (local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Good morning.  To my fellow speakers at this conference, particularly with the economic minister of the UAE, thank you for recognizing President Obama’s purpose in suggesting such a conference.  I am not going to spend any time today talking to you about the U.S. economy, but I am going to suggest that we, all nations, are in this together.  The fact that our economy is three and a half times as large as the next largest economy and larger than the next four combined does not make us immune from what’s happening around the world.
And I’m here today to speak to you entrepreneurs.  I’m here today to speak to all of those of you who we look to and will be looking to in each of our countries to assure that we continue to grow and we continue to be open.  So I say hello to everyone here and thank you for being here.  (Applause.)
But before I get to my main topic and the focus of this conference, let me just say that I know we all wish the Prime Minister could join us today.  And I look forward to personally visiting with him after this meeting to wish him a speedy recovery on behalf of President Obama and our entire administration.  (Applause.)
I would also say to our host, particularly to the speaker, that I’ve had a great couple of days here in Turkey.  And I want to thank the Turkish people, and their leaders, for their hospitality.
I’ve had very productive meetings so far.  Yesterday, I met with my old friend, President Gul, as well as the Speaker, who is here today and will be speaking next.  And I want to thank him for arranging a breakfast that he arranged for me yesterday with members of the Parliament.  I hope he found it as useful as I did.
My discussions this week here in Turkey have covered many topics of mutual concern to both our countries.  Our close collaboration in NATO, Afghanistan and Iraq; our joint efforts against the PKK, which continues to launch appalling attacks that claim innocent lives; regional issues from the brutal repression in Syria where Turkey -- where we stand with Turkey and a growing chorus of nations in calling for President Asad to step aside.  And I welcomed the Human Rights Council’s condemnation yesterday of the regime’s violence.
And the constitutional reforms we discussed that are taking place here in Turkey, which we hope and I know all in Turkey hope, will strengthen Turkey’s already strong democracy and respect for human rights.  And President Gul and I discussed my hope that Turkey and Israel, two steadfast American allies, can find opportunities to strengthen their own relationship.
So, ladies and gentlemen, the United States and Turkey have been NATO allies since 1952 and I am pleased to say that today our economic relationship is flourishing as well as our long-term military relationship.  Trade between our nations grew by 45 percent this year alone.  And I think it’s both to the benefit -- I know it’s to the benefit of the American people and I feel certain it’s also to the benefit of the people of Turkey.  And that’s why President Obama was so pleased that Prime Minister Erdogan agreed to host this meeting here in this magnificent city.
And I also want to thank -- as I’ve already done personally -- the United Arab Emirates, which has agreed to host next year’s summit.  As I said to the Sultan, I hope -- I plan on being there assuming I am re-elected.  (Applause.)  And I hope we represent -- but I’m confident whomever is leading my country will be there with the minister of economic affairs.
In June of 2009 in a speech that’s already been referenced given by President Obama in Cairo, the President announced our intent to deepen ties between American entrepreneurs and their counterparts from countries around the world with significant Muslim populations.  And 10 months later, the first Global Entrepreneurship Summit brought to Washington innovators -- many of   today -- from 50 nations in five continents.
President Obama said then, and I quote, “We’ve come together today because of what we share, a belief that we are all bound together by certain common aspirations -- to live in dignity, to get an education, to live healthy lives and maybe start a business without having to pay tribute or a bribe to anyone, to speak freely and have a say in how we are governed, to live in peace and security and to give our children a better future.”
So the question might be asked, how does entrepreneurship have anything to do with those larger aspirations?  There was no way at the time the President made that speech that several months later many of these same principles, those aspirational notions about the desire for dignity and freedom of speech and good governance and the chance for a better life would begin to transform the Middle East and North Africa.
I suspect that many of you assembled here in this magnificent hall today, whether or not you’ve ever been politically active, felt some of the same affinity that many of us felt for those in the streets who were seeking to build something far larger than just something for themselves.  That’s because democratic revolutions like the ones in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya -- and the ones still unfolding in Syria and Yemen --are imbued, literally imbued with entrepreneurial spirit, a spirit that requires risk and initiative, steadfast determination, and a unifying idea.
They aim to do more than merely change the government which is in power, but also to end practices like authoritarianism, corruption, the stifling of free expression -- practices that make political and economic freedom impossible.  And they take advantage and have taken advantage of the technologies of their time, whether it was 30 years ago with radio waves that penetrated the Iron Curtain during the Cold War or Twitter feeds that spread the details of Libyan troop movements in an attempt to prevent attacks on civilians.
The revolution that gave birth to my own country was inspired by the same desire for freedom and ensured that from its earliest days America has been hard-wired for innovation.  Back then, it was pamphleteers like Thomas Paine.  Today, it’s modern new technologies that connect us in an instant.
A political system founded on the rule of law and the protection of basic liberties, including the freedom of speech and the freedom of religion provide the truest shield against sectarian strife that too often has afflicted this region and in previous centuries western Europe; an educational system that trains students not merely to learn and accept established orthodoxy, but to be skeptical, to challenge and improve on the ideas that are being presented to them; an economic system that not only encourages fair competition, but richly rewards those who excel.  The foundation -- this foundation has enabled generations of Americans and others to give life to world-changing ideas, in our country ideas from the cotton gin to the airplane to the microchip to the Internet -- world-leading companies like General Electric, Ford Motor Company, Microsoft, Apple, Google and I could go on and list many others.
And breakthroughs in medicine and medical technologies that may not have originally had a profit motive but that held the promise to benefit all of mankind, from the polio vaccine to the human genome project and many others which were started by the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health in my country or the mobile phone apps recently developed by a team of graduate students in Florida that can help diagnose malaria anywhere in the world.
America’s experience -- and that of many other nations, including many of yours -- teaches that fostering entrepreneurship is not just about crafting the right economic policy or developing the best educational curriculum.  It’s about creating a free political climate in which ideas and innovation can flourish.
Simply put, governments that protect liberties, embrace transparency allow for vibrant civil societies.  Give women equal opportunity.  They are the ones that pave the way for thriving cultures and entrepreneurs.  (Applause.)  It cannot happen without that.  
Meanwhile, countries that try to have it both ways, for example, making the Internet closed to free expression but open for business, those countries will find that approach is a dead end not because of anything the United States says or any other country, because they are totally inconsistent.  They may try to build walls between these different activities, but there isn’t a separate economic Internet, a political Internet and a social Internet.  There is simply an Internet and it must remain free and open.  (Applause.)  That is your conduit.  That is the conduit of all you brilliant, young minds who I’m looking at now.  That is the conduit through which entrepreneurship will flourish.  
We’re all here because we believe in the power of entrepreneurship to transform lives and lift up entire communities and nations.  It is no coincidence, ladies and gentlemen, that 19 of the top 20 most prosperous countries in the world are also the most entrepreneurial countries in the world, according to leading international indexes.
That’s why it’s so fitting that we meet here in Turkey today.  My old friend, the former foreign minister and now the economic minister spoke to Turkey’s great progress as did the economic minister.  A remarkable economic success story where the economy has tripled in size over the past decade, exports have quadrupled and per capita income has grown dramatically, allowing families to build better lives for themselves and for their children, and a better promise for their grandchildren. 
I understand that our ambassador, the U.S. ambassador to Turkey, said not too long ago that the next Steve Jobs may be a Turk.  Well, that’s a worthy goal.  (Applause.)  He also may be in the UAE.  He or she may be anywhere in the world.  Already, Turkey is cultivating its own brand of homegrown talents, some of whom are here today.  
In 2007, Mr. Ozturk founded a company called 41-29, named for Istanbul -- the coordinates of the city of Istanbul.  It quickly became Turkey’s leading digital marketing agency specializing in advergames, virtual videos, social media.  And it made Facebook’s exclusive list of 40 “preferred developers.”
Ms. Hulya opened Turkey’s -- the first Turkish chain of women’s workout facilities in 2006.  Already this entrepreneur has opened 45 gyms nationwide, all of them I might add run by female franchisees.
Turkey is now the 17th largest economy in the world.  And, as you heard today, it aspires to be more, one of the world’s top ten economies by 2023, the 100th anniversary I might add of the founding of the Turkish Republic.  With what I know about Turkey’s people and its leaders over the past 35 years and what I’ve seen in the last decade, and what I’ve seen this week, I’d say that’s a pretty good bet.  (Applause.)
To secure the sort of future we all seek, each of us here must do our part -- not just our nations, each of us individually must do our part.  Aspiring entrepreneurs must do what comes naturally to them -- dream, take chances, and in the memorable phrase coined by Steve Jobs -- “think different.”  (Applause.)  For those who think the same do not hold the promise of progress.
Established entrepreneurs and chambers of commerce must mentor the next generation -- as this conference is all about -- share the wisdom gained by their successes and their failures and perhaps just as importantly help them learn from your mistakes.  Universities and corporations must work together through research and internships to nurture and develop entrepreneurial skills of students before they graduate, because the single, most valuable resource on the planet is not what’s in the ground, but what’s in our minds.  That is the most valuable resource that we possess in the minds of individuals, which we all have to work to cultivate.
Investors must occasionally be willing to take a chance on an unknown talent and an unknown and unproven dream.   And governments must unlock the marketplace of ideas, because it’s hard to think different if you’re not free to think and openly express what you’re thinking.  And governments must unlock the commercial marketplace by facilitating access to capital, removing cumbersome regulations and ending corrupt practices like bribes, all of which stifle competition.  Countries that take this path will find ready partners in other nations with thriving entrepreneurial cultures, including my own.
Let me give you a few important examples of how the United States is delivering on the commitments President Obama made in Cairo and at the first entrepreneurial summit, because as was mentioned earlier by the minister, just as in his country, in my country a promise made is a promise kept.
In Egypt, our Overseas Private Investment Corporation is providing financing of up to $1 billion to support public-private partnerships in energy, health, waste-water treatment, as well as facilities for small and medium-sized entrepreneurs for lending and housing and consumer financing.  In Tunisia, we are providing job placement, business entrepreneurial and social entrepreneurship programs for up to 800 youth.
In Iraq, where I just left, 45 percent more college students studied in the United States than the last year.  We are working with the government of Iraq to ensure those numbers will increase.  In Baghdad, the government is wisely funding 10,000 scholarships for its students to study abroad.  And America’s goal is to attract 30 percent of those students -- 3,000 of them -- at America’s universities.
In eight different countries and territories, including Turkey, we have launched a program called Partnership for a New Beginning, which brings together government, private sector and civil society leaders to build and deepen engagement in areas of economic opportunity, science & technology, education and exchange.  Among its diverse programs are life skills training programs for Indonesia’s undergraduates, safe gathering space for Egyptian activists to discuss reform and tele-medicine training for Pakistani health workers.
We’re also promoting and protecting intellectual property rights not just because so much of our intellectual policy -- property is stolen worldwide.  Tens of billions of dollars is stolen every year.  But that’s not the major reason we’re promoting this.  Because without protection of international property in every country, the country that does not protect it, the society that tolerates the theft of innovation will never develop its own indigenous capacity to create, whether in music or film, software or pharmaceuticals.
For you young entrepreneurs, why would you take the risk of your intellectual property being stolen in your own country?  And what incentive is there for a country to develop their own entrepreneurship, their own new ideas if all they have to do is go and steal them.  It’s a self-defeating proposition for the country that does not protect intellectual property.  (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, it will not surprise you, but we are particularly focused on encouraging women entrepreneurs because societies that deny women basic rights are squandering half of their intellectual capital.  The most valuable asset any country has, as I said, are the minds of their people, all of their people.  And in case you haven’t figured it out, women are just as bright as any man.  (Applause.)  
Study after study has shown that those nations that refuse to empower women to participate in economic affairs will be and have been left behind.  Their societies have not developed.  Already, in the developing world, almost half of the businesses, half of the new businesses are women-owned.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, we launched The African Women's Entrepreneurship Program,  which brings businesswomen to the United States for training related to trade and advocacy, and opportunities to meet U.S. political and business leaders, industrial associations and non-profit organizations.  Almost two-fifths of the participants who came have reported already that their businesses expanded upon their return, including a Tanzanian textile producer who signed a deal with a major American fashion designer Rachel Roy, assuring that she will make a great deal of money and employ a lot of her own people.
We’re also fulfilling a pledge President Obama made in Cairo to build networks of entrepreneurs and expand exchanges in education and to foster cooperation in science and technology.  We have led delegations of businesspeople and investors to Lebanon, Turkey, Egypt, Jordan, Tunisia, Indonesia, Morocco, and Algeria.
And lest you misunderstand me, we also understand in these exchanges we stand -- we, the United States stands -- to learn something.  We stand to benefit, because we are fully aware that the seed of innovation, change, technology and science does not rest in the United States alone.  And starting next year, the Global Entrepreneurship Summit will partner with the Kauffman Foundation and Global Entrepreneurship Week, the world’s largest celebration of business innovation will participate in 123 countries to expand the reach of this summit in the years to come, because we believe in you.  We believe in your capacity.  (Applause.) 
Ladies and gentlemen, as the great inventor Thomas Edison said, “To have a great idea, you need to have a lot of ideas."  And he was right.  This is the premise on which the Global Entrepreneurship Summit is based.  Once, the wealth of a nation was primarily measured by the abundance of its natural resources, the expanse of its landmass, the size of its population and the power of its armies.
Today, the true wealth of a nation is found in the creative minds of its people and their freedom and ability to bring those ideas to life -- to develop not only new products, but the technologies that will create entirely new industries, entire new markets, entire new opportunities.  We cannot prosper in the 21st century built on the industries of the 20th century.  But let me state it again, none of this can happen without governments that guarantee the right to “think different,” as Steve Jobs said.  Our presence at this Summit is a testament to our shared belief in this notion.
Despite these difficult economic times, when I look out at the talent assembled here in this great hall, I’m optimistic.  And I really mean this, I am optimistic about the future more than I have ever been in my entire 39-year career.  The spirit and the drive that brought all of you here today are the engines that will help build a better tomorrow for our families, for your families, for our neighbors, for your fellow citizens.
Therein lies the U.S. objective in sponsoring this.  We benefit when nations grow.  We benefit when you are secure.  We benefit when people can provide for themselves.  We benefit when democracies flourish.  And democracies flourish when entrepreneurs are part of the engine of that democratic instinct one idea at a time.  One idea at a time is what is going to build the 20th century -- the 21st century in a better and more coherent and less conflictual state than the 20th century.
Let me conclude by thanking all of you for being here. Thank you for your skill.  (Applause.)  Thank you for your passion, your passion and your self confidence to believe in yourselves and the hard work it takes to bring an idea to life.  I’m inspired to be here among you and I look forward to seeing how you reshape this world of ours.  The promise is amazing.  The promise is amazing.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is a quote I often use -- and if you excuse me for quoting an Irish poet.  I quoted this to the speaker when we had breakfast.  It was an Irish poet named William Butler Yeats who describing the transition taking place in his Ireland in 1916 wrote a poem that had the following line in it, a line that was intended to describe his Ireland at the moment.  But I would respectfully suggest it describes the Middle East and the world today even better than it described his country at the moment.  And here’s the line from that poem.  He said, “All has changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.”
All has changed not only in the Middle East in the last 20 years, but in the world at large.  We are at a inflection point in world history, a point at which my physics professor used to say, an inflection point is when you sit behind the wheel of an automobile that is going 60 miles an hour and abruptly you turn it five degrees in one direction.  It means you will never be back on the path you once were.  It is impossible to return to that path.
We are at one of those inflection points in world history.  But the good news is the reason for my optimism is you, you entrepreneurs.  You’re the ones that have your hand on the wheel.  And you have a chance like no other generation of entrepreneurs to direct the world, to steer it, to bend the curve in the direction of progress, openness, humanity.
So we’re relying on you more than just for your business acumen.  We’re relying on you for your passion and your understanding that only through a free exchange of ideas, the ability to think different, can the world be made better.  God bless you all.  (Applause.)
END           
12:16 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  December 01, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at Event to Honor U.S. and Iraqi Servicemembers
12:42 P.M. AST

        VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  It’s an honor to stand here with President Talabani and Prime Minister Maliki.  All of us are gathered here for the same reason.  We’re gathered here to thank the armed forces of Iraqi and America and to honor your sacrifice, to honor your success as well as your commitment.

        I also want to say to my colleagues that not only have we worked together, but I consider each of you a friend.  We have spent more time together than either of you ever anticipated, I expect.  And I’ve come to respect you both and all my interlocutors here in Iraq.  

        I also know you gentlemen will acknowledge that America sent you the very best our country has to offer -- our young men and women, about whom I'll say more in a moment, but also their leaders.  Not only are Ambassador Jim Jeffrey and General Lloyd Austin outstanding diplomats and an outstanding warrior, but they’re outstanding men, and our country is extremely proud of you both.  And I want to thank you both.

        I wish everyone out there watching this on television could see the view from this stage where I stand right now.  This palace, a grotesque monument to a dictator’s greed, is totally filled with American and Iraqi warriors who are bound together by a shared sacrifice in the service of both their countries -- an appropriate use of this palace today.  Here in Iraq, you warriors became partners and friends, and now, undeniably, brothers-in-arms.  All of you sitting before me today have laid the foundation for a long-term, strategic partnership between our nations and also for an Iraq that, against all odds, can serve as a source of stability not only for its people, but here in the region, and for years to come.

        I think it’s fair to say almost no one thought that was possible a few years ago.  So, on behalf of President Obama and the American people, let me say to both our armed forces today, thank you.  Thank you for your heroic work that each one of you has done to bring about this moment.  Because of you -- and it’s no exaggeration to say that -- because of you and the work those of you in uniform have done -- we are now able to end this war.

        This journey began, as referenced by the Prime Minister and the President, more than eight-and-a-half years ago.  March 19, 2003 was a very uncertain time in both our countries.  As a result of our joint efforts, we toppled a murderous dictator, and after a grave struggle, gave Iraq both the time and the space for a society that has long suffered, long been stifled.  We gave it the time and the space to reconstitute, and a political culture based on free elections and the rule of law to take hold.

        Today we come together at another moment of transition.  In America, and in Iraq, the tide of war is receding.  And our relationship, borne on the battlefield and long defined by the imperative of security alone, is now giving way to a new, more normal partnership between sovereign nations seeking to build a future together.

        President Obama and I came to office absolutely determined to bring this war to a responsible end, and to keep the promise we made to the American people and the people of Iraq that we would meet our commitments.  Mr. Prime Minister, as you have seen, we are doing just that.

        We kept our promise to remove all American troops from Iraq -- Iraqi cities.  We kept our promise to end our combat mission last August and to reduce our forces in Iraq to 50,000.  At the end of this month, we will keep our promise to remove our remaining troops from Iraq, which, when we came to office, numbered 140,000 American forces.  Where I come from, where the President comes from, a promise made is a promise kept.  And we are keeping our promise.

        At every step along the way, as the Prime Minister pointed out, there were skeptics -- skeptics who said, don’t move too fast; what if the Iraqis aren’t ready to take on this responsibility?  But the Iraq security forces proved to be more than ready.  You met the challenge.  Throughout the downturn of United States forces and coalition forces, you kept your people safe.  And violence has remained at its lowest level since 2003  -- because of you.

        So when President Obama and Prime Minister Maliki spoke this October 21st, they were in total agreement on the way forward. They agreed that the end of this phase of our relationship would be marked by the start of a new chapter -- a fresh start that the Iraqi people and the American people want, and so richly deserve.

        I think the medal the Prime Minister is going to unveil later today has a perfect name:  The Commitment Medal.  Because it speaks to our nations' enduring commitment to one another, even as the nature of our mutual relationship evolves.  It commemorates our cooperation under the security agreement, which expires at the end of this month.  But it also reflects our mutual desire to embrace a new stage of our relationship, one that will be guided by the Strategic Framework Agreement -- again, referenced by my colleagues -- the Strategic Framework Agreement, which calls for broad cooperation across a wide range of areas of policy, including democratic institutions and diplomatic relations, trade and finance, energy, services, law enforcement and the judiciary, and culture and education -- and which, unlike our security agreement, does not expire.

        The significance of this agreement lies not in just what it states, but what it stands for.  It stands for a fundamentally different type of relationship, grounded in civilian cooperation between equal sovereigns.  It means an opportunity to help a new Iraqi democracy secure its place in the community of responsible nations.  It means America will remain deeply engaged here in Iraq, and throughout the region; a comprehensive relationship which we are building that will include security cooperation, a standard feature of our relations with many countries, including the training on the military equipment that we will sell to this sovereign nation.  

        In that effort, we’ll be building on a strong foundation:  the deep ties that were forged in battle that made Iraq one of the 10 largest purchasers of U.S. military equipment, and the fourth largest in the region.  And we'll continue to assist Iraq in other areas -- when asked -- where we've made commitments, such as helping those displaced by war inside Iraq and in neighboring countries.  

        Yesterday, Prime Minister Maliki and I chaired a meeting of the Higher Coordinating Committee, a body created by the Strategic Framework Agreement, and charged with overseeing the important work of bringing this new relationship to life.

        This is a young population in Iraq.  Over 50 percent of Iraq’s population is under the age of 20.  And I say to you, American warriors, and to you, Iraqi soldiers, because of the progress that you have made, that young generation will not have to suffer the same indignities and depravations that plagued their parents and their grandparents.  That is an incredible accomplishment, and is due to the work of so many of you in this room, and also the hundreds of thousands of others who've walked in your boots and in your shoes.

        I've been coming here for a long time -- close to 20.  The change has been stark since my first visit.  I don’t need to remind any of you assembled in this palace that it was only a few years ago that hundreds of bodies a day piled up in the morgue in Baghdad -- that a bullet slipped in an envelope and slid under the door became an unmistakable signal to abandon your home, or else; that highways had become minefields and the daily commute was a test of your faith.  If you knew Iraq back then, as so many of you in this room did, and as I saw on my so many visits here, then you'd know how incredibly far we have come, and why the cynics should not doubt how much further you will move.

        One statistic illustrates this progress:  In 2007, Iraqis suffered 1,600 violent incidents per week.  Today, because of your work, that number is under 100 incidences per week -- more than there should be, but more than a tenfold decrease.  And it wasn't luck.  It wasn't an accident.  It was the sacrifice and bravery and professionalism of all of you assembled before me in uniform that made it possible.  And it will not and should not be forgotten -- either in Iraq, or in my home country of the United States of America.

        What you all know is that it doesn’t mean that the threats are over.  Far from it.  Violent extremists continue to launch appalling attacks against innocent civilians, fire deadly rockets at diplomats merely trying to do their job, and threaten Iraqi troops and police who are sworn to protect their own people.  But Iraqi security forces have been well trained, prepared, and you are fully capable of meeting the challenge.  And Iraq’s emerging, inclusive political culture will be the ultimate guarantor -- the ultimate guarantor -- of this stability.

        When we announced this way forward in October, there were those who charged that America was abandoning Iraq and that one of two outcomes would result -- you’ve heard it and I’ve heard it -- either Iraq would slide back into ethnic or sectarian war, or that other countries in the region would unwelcomingly fill the vacuum.  In my view, in the President’s view, those arguments not only misunderstand the Iraqi politics, but they underestimate the Iraqi people.

        First, the lesson of the last few years in Iraq is that, while there remain strong disagreements over matters of policy, Iraq’s leaders are opting for political solutions, not violence. I’ve said many times -- and some of my friends in the front row have heard me say it time and again, and it’s often overlooked, an overlooked development in Iraq -- politics has broken out.  Politics has become the dominant means of settling disputes and advancing interest.  And as you've all learned, in all democracies, politics is sometimes messy -- not just in Iraq. And as President Obama and I have said early in our administration, the pursuit of perfection should not stand in the way of advancing achievable goals, continually.  Disputes are now settled within the bounds of acceptable give-and-take.  And that’s a huge and necessary step forward.

        The second point is that we learned over more than eight years in Iraq that this country’s independent, patriotic spirit is stitched into its national fabric.  The Iraqi people will not, have not, and will not again yield to any external domination.  And they would never abide another nation violating their sovereignty by funding or directing militias that use Iraqi terrain for proxy battles that kill innocent Iraqi civilians.  That’s why I’m confident.  

        President Harry Truman once described the end of war -- and I quote -- as a “solemn but glorious hour.”  Honoring those who fought this war also requires us to remember all that was lost.  More than one million Americans -- and if you’ll excuse the personal reference -- including my son -- served on this soil -- 4,486 of your comrades, 4,486 fallen angels have made the ultimate sacrifice.  And more than 30,000 were wounded, many of whom, because of the advanced medical care, survived trauma that would have killed men and women in the earlier wars of this nation, and now live a life with horrific injuries.  Others bear scars, invisible scars, for all that they’ve experienced.  

        We honor their sacrifice, as well as yours -- and we take immense pride and success in what you have done.  And we owe you. We owe you.  And the only sacred obligation our nation has is to care for those who we send to war, and care for them when they come home.  

        With all due respect for those who came before you, I strongly believe that America’s forces today, including those of you in this room, are truly the finest forces that our nation has ever produced -- ever.  And if you forgive me, Mr. Prime Minister and Mr. President, I think they’re the finest in the world.

        In Iraq, American fighting men and women were given a mission as complicated and as challenging as any in our history. Your troops were steeped in military doctrine, but you were asked to deal with vagaries of local politics and issues ranging from electricity to unemployment, currency exchange to trash collection.  You adapted.  You succeeded.  You defeated a tyrant -- you helped defeat a tyrant, helped beat back violent extremists, and enabled the rise of a new democratic nation, and gave the Iraqi people a chance, at long last, for a better future -- a future they deserve.

        And now, in the finest tradition -- the finest American tradition -- having carried out your mission, you’re leaving.  Taking nothing with you but your experiences, your achievements, and the pride associated with a hard job well done.

        And for you Iraqis, the cost of war was still greater.  Hundreds of thousands of your fellow citizens lost their lives.  National bonds stretched to the breaking point.  You have known more than 30 years of sustained trauma -- dictatorship, economic isolation, and extended periods of war and terror.  And from the ashes of so much turmoil, you raised an army that all of Iraq and the world can be proud of, so that you can keep your people safe. And even more remarkable, you've forged a political culture based on free elections and the rule of law.

        After all you’ve been through, this is what Iraq deserves.  You're the heirs to a civilization that was once the cultural beacon for all humanity, and you're also the heirs to a vast natural bounty on which a modern society can be built.

        What stands before you now is nothing less than the prospect of a normal and a prosperous life for your people.  A life where you can kiss your children goodbye each morning without wondering if that kiss will be the last.  A life where ordinary citizens need not live in fear of their government or their neighbors.  A life where this country’s vast natural and human resources can fuel an economy which can provide abundance for all.  Normal life may not yet be a reality for every Iraqi, but, God willing, it is within your reach.

        Eight years ago, on the eve of war, an art critic in this storied capital of Baghdad told a foreign journalist that he did not fear the future because he took solace in the past.  And here is what he said:  "So many crises have visited Baghdad, and we have faced all of them.  The soul of Baghdad,” he said, “will remain.”  

        The tide of war is receding, and the soul of Baghdad remains.  The soul of Iraq remains.  And you in this room -- the political leadership and military leadership, and the American forces -- helped make the possible.  And your fellow citizens owe all of you a debt that I don’t believe can ever be fully repaid.

        I want to thank you all for allowing me to be here on this historic day, an historic day for both the United States and for Iraq.  Our forces are leaving, with their heads held high.  But the hard-won ties between our two nations, pray God, will live on.  

        May God be with the people of Iraq on this new journey, and may God bless America.  (Applause.)

END 1:09 P.M. AST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 30, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at the Conclusion of a Meeting of the U.S.-Iraq Higher Coordinating Committee
Governmental Palace
Baghdad, Iraq
 11:47 A.M. (Local)
 
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. Prime Minister, my distinguished colleagues, as I stated at the outset, both our countries are now launching on a new phase of this relationship.  What we discussed here today was not totally new, but what we discussed here today was a way forward.
 
We will continue to keep our promises as we have thus far.  We will in fact, as I said at the outset, draw down our military forces by the end of December in agreement with the so-called SOFA that was signed some years ago.  And we’re embarking on a new -- and I think we learned today, or we discussed today a new and a comprehensive civilian relationship between the United States and Iraq as sovereign partners in a way that will benefit, as I said at the outset, not only Iraq but the region and in turn the world.
 
Our civilian mission in Iraq -- I think it’s worth saying this -- is sized.  It is big, as the Foreign Minister said.  But it’s sized to meet the request and the obligations and the promises we’ve made.  The reason it’s as big as it is, and I say this for American audiences as well as Iraqi audiences is because in order to fully meet the obligations that the strategic framework agreement calls for, in order for Iraq to meet its incredible promise, incredible opportunities that it has before it, that we will have in country, on hand for direct relationships -- and the last thing we just discussed is how can we make these coordinating meetings more available, more regularized and more engaging because there’s so much opportunity and so much work to be done.  So we will have in country, which we don't in every country, on hand experts, U.S. experts in every one of the fields that we discussed here today. 
 
It is not a matter of us having the luxury of being able to send -- or Iraq -- diplomats and experts back and forth across the world.  If we’re going to get this job done together, we need to have people on the spot, on the job, in place, immediately accessible for meetings and emergencies relating to their areas they're concerned with in a matter of hours, not a matter of weeks’ planning.  So that's the reason why we’re going to have in country not only diplomatic experts but experts on trade, agriculture, education, health care, transportation, rule of law, energy, security and the list goes on because I don't know about you, Mr. Prime Minister, but occasionally I at home have to explain why we have such a large embassy here.  Why.
 
We are here for one reason and only one reason:  to assist in the development of the capacity of this great nation.  Because as you develop, as you reach your potential which has been stinted by -- stunted by Saddam and terror following it, it is good for the whole world, it will bring stability to this region.  That is our sole interest in Iraq.  Period.  End of story.
 
And so in the coming months, the various joint coordinating committees in order to implement what we’ve set out here, as the Foreign Minister said earlier, is going to require some traditional, normal written agreements that accommodate all of the people we have here.  And we appreciate that cooperation.  We appreciate that is not -- that's what normally occurs where we have these bilateral relationships.  But it just is bigger here because the need is greater and the request is more consequential.
 
As we have seen today our relationship continues to evolve in a positive way, notwithstanding the naysayers in your country and the naysayers in our country.  Every year, every visit I have made here, the cooperation evolves -- is more positive.  It has.  It’s difficult.  But it is constantly moving in a direction that is forward.
 
We’ve in both our countries had to overcome certain misperceptions in both our countries, and we’ll continue to have to do that.  In my country some question, is this worth it?  Why are we continuing to expend so much energy and money?  In your country I’m sure it’s the same thing you hear.  Why do you need these guys?  Why do you want them around? 
 
The truth of the matter is -- the truth of the matter is I think you have demonstrated and we have demonstrated jointly that it’s worth it.  It is worth it as costly and as difficult and sometimes as controversial as it is. 
 
An example, the first meeting of this joint committee, this high committee was one that took place in January of 2009 at the time the SOFA was put forward.  If I’m not mistaken, you and your colleagues suggested, Mr. Prime Minister, that it couldn’t just be about security.  It had to be more.  And so we set this committee up -- not this committee, we agreed on having a long-term, strategic agreement that went well beyond security.  So the first meeting took place in January of 2009.  The number of committees that existed under this umbrella committee were relatively small.  It met then again in July of 2009 in a new administration. 
 
If I’m not mistaken, Mr. Prime Minister, it was your suggestion and a very good one that we increase -- we increase the interchange that this committee had, increase the areas of -- that this committee was going to cover.  It was suggested that we talk about student visas.  It was suggested that we expand and have a committee relating to trade and commerce, et cetera.  It continued to grow.  It continued to expand as the needs became apparent and the help was available.
 
Today, in this meeting, the Foreign Minister and our ambassador agreed that, well, we should have another committee -- another committee within this committee based on security.
 
The point I’m trying to make is both our people should understand that this is of the mutual benefit to each of us and to the region, and as it continues to grow, the opportunities -- we stand ready to the extent that you want assistance.  We stand ready to be of assistance with expertise that we have.  Had you not been under the thumb of Saddam Hussein for so long and the victim of terror for so long, you would not need this help.  You all have the capacity.  You all have the capacity to do everything that need be done here.  But as one of you said today, you’re kind of starting from scratch.  There has not been the availability of these institutions to have developed and changed and grown over the past half a century as they have in our country.  We have no doubt that your capacity is as unlimited as your natural resources. 
 
As was pointed out here today, already a great deal has been done.  Most people in both -- I’ll speak for my country.  Most people in our country think that bulk of what we’ve done relates to security.  Well, as was pointed out by our colleagues today, the United States has completed nearly 1,800 projects in Iraq’s health sector valued at over $800 million -- close to $1 billion -- renovating 133 primary health care centers; providing critical emergency maternity care, along with medical and dental equipment.  With the government of Iraq, we’ve jointly built, renovated and expanded hospitals in Basra, Baku [sic] and so on throughout this country.  We’ve just launched a $74 million project to improve primary health care at 360 clinics in over 18 provinces.  That has nothing to do with self-interest.  It has to do with the needs of the people of Iraq because for you to reach your potential, you not only need an educated population but a healthy population.  So I admit most of this is directed -- what I’m saying today -- toward my citizens. 
 
The United States government has invested over $100 million in Iraq’s transportation infrastructure, helping update regulations and standards in Iraq’s civilian aviation authority.  Iraq’s civilian air traffic controllers -- $60 million; dispatching systems for the Iraqi railways, et cetera. 
 
So the generic point that I want to make is the one you all have made, and we’ve it made in private, but the press should know -- the press should know that this is about developing a people’s capacity, it’s about developing what every people in the world are entitled to, the opportunity to choose their own future and have a chance to realize their great potential.
 
So I want to thank everyone involved in preparing for this meeting.  It’s clear that a lot of work remains to be done to make it a success.  I’ve been impressed as I’ve just outlined by the progress that has been made to date, and I expect even greater progress to come.  Now it’s time for us to get to work in the coming months the various joint coordinating committees are going to meet and meet more regularly in order to implement the plans we’ve discussed here today.  The menu is very large, very large.  The opportunities are immense.
 
As you’ve heard we have big plans.  Just to cite a few.  We’re going to continue to expand our trade engagement, working hard to connect U.S. and Iraqi businesses in order to benefit the economies of both our countries, as well as connecting the rest of the world’s businesses with Iraq.  We don't look at this as an opportunity for the United States to have business opportunities.  Again, everyone will benefit the more engaged, the more countries, the more Arab, as well as non-Arab countries that are engaged in -- and European countries engaged with Iraq.
 
The fact is that we are demonstrating our commitment, 85 American companies are going to -- with a market capitalization of $1 trillion recently participated in a trade fair here in Baghdad.   We’re going to expand exchange opportunities to connect agro-entrepreneurs with U.S. counterparts to improve agriculture as was mentioned here earlier today.  We’re going to collaborate to improve, as was your idea in 2009, Mr. Prime Minister, that we should have a joint committee on local law enforcement and police training.  We’re going to launch a new security, defense and joint coordinating committee to serve as an important forum for determining the future contours of our security relationship, made jointly and made as equal sovereigns.
 
As I stated before, our nations are embarking on a new phase of our relationship.  Our military forces are going to draw down.  There will still be security concerns, but we are confident your government is fully capable of handling those internal security concerns.  And by far from leaving Iraq, the United States is going to deepen our engagement with you as we  build a comprehensive relationship with a sovereign power.
 
And under the leadership of our able ambassador, in my view one of the best ambassadors -- I mean this sincerely, I’ve been doing this a long time, Mr. Prime Minister, you have gotten our best, our very best in Ambassador Jeffrey; and you know you got our best in General Austin.
 
And under their leadership, under Jeffrey’s leadership now, his mission as I said is going to be staffed by serious, serious, serious civilian experts at his disposal and at your disposal as you wish them -- only if you wish them. 
 
The next milestone in what will be a historic month in our relationship will come in less than two weeks when you and President Obama and I -- when President Obama and I welcome you, Mr. Prime Minister, and your delegation to Washington.
 
Mr. Prime Minister, the President and I -- and I speak for the President -- we very much look forward to your visit.  And we thank you and the Iraq government for your leadership.  And we look forward -- we look forward to building a mature 21st century relationship with a nation that has much, much to contribute to the world and to the region.
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.
 
END
12:03 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 30, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at the Opening of a Meeting of the U.S.-Iraq Higher Coordinating Committee
Governmental Palace
Baghdad, Iraq  
10:30 A.M. (Local)
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Prime Minister, thank you very much for your gracious welcome.  We have -- presumptuous of me to say, but we have become good friends and acquaintances over the years.  This is my eighth trip just since being elected Vice President and close to 20 since early on.
 
As some of your colleagues know, and I’ve had the great pleasure of knowing some of your colleagues for even longer, I am one, along with the President and my whole country, that recognizes the incredible depth and strength of an ancient culture that -- with great natural resources, the most important of those resources are your people -- your people.  And your people have suffered for the past decades, first under the tyranny of Saddam Hussein, and then victimization -- being victimized by terror.  And I have the overwhelming -- have an overwhelming amount of respect for not only the sacrifice your people have been required to make but the resolve with which they have met each of the challenges that has faced them.
 
Few nations have gone through what you have gone through, and few nations in recent history have made the progress you’ve made.  But it’s because -- again, because of the incredible natural resource which rests in the people of Iraq.
 
Now -- it may sound somewhat presumptuous for me to say this, but now Iraq is poised to join the community of nations who are great contributors to the world, contributors in terms of culture, resources -- contributors in terms of the notion of the emerging non-distinction East or West, about the rule of law, the right of people to determine their own destiny.
 
And you are, as you said, Mr. Prime Minister, a great example of a nation who has worked their way through their travail and are expressing their peoples’ wills.
 
And with regard to the relationship between Iraq and the United States, we realize we are one of many relationships you will have.  We feel a particular kinship to you because our people, our military in particular, has made sacrifices as well along the way.  But this is a relationship going forward -- as you said, moving from one agreement -- the SOFA, which was a military agreement to a strategic framework agreement, which is a much broader agreement; agreements that are made between nations that are built on respect -- respect for their sovereignty, respect and -- for the will of the people of each of our countries. So it’s an honor to co-host this meeting with you today, Mr. Prime Minister, the U.S.-Iraq Higher Coordinating Committee established by the strategic framework agreement.
 
And I say on behalf of President Obama that we want to thank everyone here -- everyone here for the hard work that has gone into planning this important meeting.  This is not the first meeting of the strategic framework committee of the Higher Coordinating Committee but maybe it is the most symbolic of the meetings representing the shift from one that was based upon a
SOFA to one that's based upon a relationship between nations who are sovereign nations respecting each other’s interest and deciding to cooperate with one another in the interest of one another.
 
You’ve met my delegation, but I’d like particularly to point out that we have Assistant Secretary of State Jeff Feltman who is here, who is very knowledgeable of the area, the region and is someone who is greatly respected by the President; as well as Deputy Secretary of Energy Dan Poneman, who is here as well.
 
And we -- all the Americans -- look forward to the presentations of our Iraqi counterparts and I hope view the presentation we have today as to how we envision proceeding with this new strategic framework agreement.
 
Iraq and the United States are two nations bound together by many things, but particularly bound together by the more than eight years of shared sacrifice and struggle.  As I indicated our strong partnership was forged in the fires of combat, has succeeded in bringing Iraq back from the brink of an all-consuming violence and has paved the way for a more peaceful and more prosperous future for the people of Iraq.
 
As I indicated, this is my eighth trip to Baghdad since being elected Vice President.  When I was here on September 1, 2010, to mark the beginning of what we refer to as Operation New Dawn, I shared a basic message with the people of Iraq and all of you on that day that I will reference again.  And I want to make it very clear:  The United States keeps its promises.  Let me say it again:  The United States of America keeps its promises. 
 
As I say more colloquially in the neighborhood I’m from, a promise made is a promise kept.  And we are keeping our promise.  We kept our promise to withdraw our troops from Iraq’s cities in 2009.  We kept our promise to end our combat mission in the summer of 2010, and now we are keeping our promise we made back in 2008 to remove our troops from Iraq by the end of this year. And they will be removed.
 
As President Obama and Prime Minister Maliki agreed when they spoke in October, drawing down our forces is not only in the best interest of Iraq, but it’s in the best interest of the United States of America, as well, and the best interest of the relationship.  In one month our troops will have left Iraq, but our close strategic partnership, as you just referenced, Mr. Prime Minister, will God willing continue.  It will continue not only in Iraq -- with Iraq but with this region.  It will continue and it will deepen in the years to come, God willing.
 
Our troops as I said are leaving Iraq, and we are embarking on a new path together, a new phase of this relationship -- a relationship again I emphasize between two sovereign nations.  The relationship will be guided by our strategic framework agreement which outlines partnerships across a range of strategic issues, including energy, trade, the rule of law, diplomacy, agriculture, education and many others.  That partnership which you have been emphasizing from the beginning -- that partnership includes a robust security relationship based on what you decide -- what you decide -- you think that relationship should be.
 
We will continue our discussions with your government over the substance of our security arrangements including areas of training, intelligence and counterterrorism.  This Higher Coordinating Committee will be the centerpiece of all these efforts.  We’ll build on what is already a broad partnership between our two nations.
 
To name just a few recent highlights of what we’ve been doing together recently I think it’s worth pointing out for both our peoples.  On the trade front, the United States has recently showcased 85 American businesses, universities and tourist organizations at the Baghdad International Trade Fair.  Over 200 off-the-floor sales were made at that fair, helping both nations’ economies; an increasing number of Iraqis studying at United States universities -- 45 percent more this year than last.  This enriches and strengthens not only the students who come to the United States, but the students in the United States with whom they will come in contact.  They will learn as much from the young Iraqis heading our way as the Iraqis will learn about us.
 
This enriches and strengthens our institutions, as well.  It helps to create an educated workforce in Iraq and creates a lasting bond between individual Americans and individual Iraqis.
 
We recently launched a robust program to provide advisory and technical assistance to civilian police services to support your efforts of rule of law while enriching your -- and enhancing your internal security, a decision that you made.
 
I look forward to hearing about these and many other issues from those in this room who are going on in each of these areas and further building these relationships.  Again, I want to thank you all for having us here today.  Thank you for your hospitality and to you, Mr. Prime Minister, for hosting this meeting.
 
From the perspective of me and the Vice President -- and the President -- as Vice President and the President, this is marking a new beginning of a relationship that will not only benefit the United States and Iraq, I believe will benefit the region and in turn benefit the world. 
 
So thank you very much again, Mr. Prime Minister, for your hospitality. 
 
END
10:42 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 November 20, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at a NASCAR-Joining Forces Military Family BBQ
Homestead-Miami Speedway
Miami, Florida
1:52 P.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Carl.  Good luck to you.  Thank you.
MR. EDWARDS:  See you.  Have fun.
MRS. OBAMA:  Watch your head.  (Laughter.)
DR. BIDEN:  Just wanted to say hello and I’m Jill Biden.  I am a military mom.  Our son Beau is Army National Guard.  He was deployed to Iraq, so I have a little bit of an idea what it’s like for all the families out there.  When we joined Michelle and Barack in this administration, one of the joys that I’ve had is that -- is working with Michelle.  We joined together.  We have Joining Forces, and we’re trying to create awareness for military families all across this country because you do such a wonderful job for us, and you take care of us, and you’re strong and resilient.  And I just want to say thank you.
And speaking of strong and resilient, I’d like to introduce my partner, our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  I’m not going to talk long because we want to spend our time with you going around from table to table, but I just join in Carl and Jill to just tell you how excited we are to be here.  This is -- both Jill and I, this is our first NASCAR race, and this is a huge race.  That I know.  It’s a big deal.  (Laughter.)
And the fact that NASCAR is taking the time that people like Carl and all the other racers, during what is probably the most tense time of their whole race season that they’re putting the focus on all of you is just what we want you to know, this is how much your country is willing to step up.
And NASCAR and everyone here at NASCAR, I want to thank Brian France.  I want to thank the folks at the Homestead-Miami Speedway.  All the folks here have been a part of making this day very special for you.  But they are among thousands of business leaders and educators and individuals who are stepping up every day for you all because we all know that we wouldn’t be able to enjoy the freedoms that we have if it weren’t for your sacrifice.
We know you guys are moms out there -- moms and dads juggling it all alone while someone is deployed.  For all the military kids out there, we want the whole country to know we know that you’re sacrificing as well.  That it’s not easy to have your mom and dad away from home for long periods of time, but you guys are strong.  You guys are leaders in your own right.  You’re taking care of your parents.  You’re getting good grades.  And I know you’re eating your vegetables, right? 
AUDIENCE MEMBERS:  Yes.
MRS. OBAMA:  Yes, yes, yes, for the vegetables.  So we are so proud of all of you, and all of this is for you.  Everyone around the country is focused on you.  And this isn’t just an effort today.  Jill and I through Joining Forces, we want to make this a part of the dialogue in this country forever.  Whether Jill or I are here or not, whether this administration is here or not, this is about the way we want this country to talk about our troops, veterans and military families forever.  We want you to feel that appreciation and that gratitude so that you know your sacrifice is not in vain.  People care about you.  They care about what you’ve done, and this is just our way of shining whatever spotlight we have on the sacrifices that you make. 
So we are so proud of you all.  Have a great day.  Have fun.  There’s that smile.  I know it’s like too many lights and cameras, but have fun, kids.  Make sure you’re doing what you’re supposed to do, and we’re going to keep looking out for you all.  So thank you so much.  Jill and I are going to come and say hello.  Thank you, guys.  We’re proud of you.  (Applause.)   
END
1:56 P.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  November 17, 2011
Remarks of Dr. Jill Biden at Bread for the World 8th Annual Gala
The Racquet and Tennis Club
New York, NY
Good evening.  Thank you to my dear friend Terry for that warm introduction.
It is an honor to be here with you, Governor O’Malley, David Beckman, and all of you who are dedicated to the mission of Bread for the World.  
For almost four decades Bread for the World has stood for the proposition that ending hunger here in the United States and around the globe is a moral imperative.  Our faith tells us that we must give food to the hungry, water to the thirsty, and shelter to the poor.  That commitment to the most vulnerable among us is grounded in our belief that every human being deserves to be treated with dignity. 
The crucially important work of Bread for the World recognizes that dignity and strives to preserve it – especially in the most dire situations.  Your leadership and advocacy are critical to the efforts to combat hunger and poverty not just in our country, but in all parts of the world. 
I saw just how important efforts like these are when I traveled to Kenya in August with Senator Bill Frist and USAID Administrator Raj Shah. 
Earlier in the summer I started to see news reports of the worst famine in 60 years in East Africa. I could not believe that I was seeing images like we saw two decades ago.    The numbers were staggering:  13 million people at risk.  29,000 children dead in three months. 
And it was clear that it was only getting worse. 
The stories touched my heart and the images of the children haunted me.  As a mother, I thought – we have to do more.
I asked my staff and those working on this issue at the White House what I could do to help – and several days later I found myself on the way to Kenya.
As you saw in the film, I traveled to the Dadaab refugee camp where hundreds of thousands of Somalis have fled. I met with families who had walked for days or weeks, often barefoot with no possessions, desperate to find food and medical care.
I spent time with a mother who had walked for 15 days with her four malnourished children. Her baby was sick with diarrhea, an ailment which seems minor to us but in this circumstance is often fatal. Like many of the women in the camps, this mother had walked day and night, through very dangerous conditions to try to save her children.
One young woman in Dadaab recounted stories of women being attacked and raped on their way to the camp – often right in front of their children. 
Just stop for a moment and try to imagine what it would be like to desperately seek food and water for your starving children, to walk hundreds of miles, facing the very real possibility of violence all along the way. 
We heard one story that I cannot put out of my mind…. a mother who was too weak to carry both of her children, had to choose, which she would try to save and which she would leave beside the road.  How can any mother make this choice? 
In the face of devastation and unimaginable challenges, these strong and resilient women are trying to make sure their families survive.  They want what each of us wants:  a safe and healthy future for themselves and their children.
While the international community has mobilized and we are helping millions of people in the region – the scope and the pace of this crisis is relentless.  Without additional assistance, hundreds of thousands more could die. And most of those deaths will be children.
But there is hope.
On my visit I saw first-hand that even the smallest and simplest investments can save lives. Aid is working. 
I am always struck by the fact that foreign aid represents less than one percent of our federal budget.  And we know that building long-term solutions now can reduce the cost of massive relief efforts and instability later.
I saw just how great the impact of our aid is on the situation in East Africa.  I saw two-dollar measles vaccines that literally mean the difference between life and death for children in these camps. I saw how ready-to-use therapeutic food treatments – the famous “plumpy nut” costing under a dollar each -- provide critical nutrition to malnourished children. And I saw how inexpensive oral rehydration packs can bring listless babies back to life.
I also saw some of the progress being made from investments in long-term food security –innovative and improved crops and irrigation methods and new ways for farmers to market and transport their products. 
Our Feed the Future initiative is, in fact, feeding the future.  We are  investing in the men and women farmers who can turn the tide by sustainably improving their communities’ economic and environmental security.  And we are reaching millions more through the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program. 
The goal of our aid is simple: to help create the conditions where such aid is no longer needed.
We all know these are tough times here at home and that doing what we can to improve the lives of families here in America is critically important.  But we also know that Americans always respond to humanitarian crises --– especially when a small donation can literally save the life of a child.
Already we are seeing individuals, businesses and other organizations come together to make a difference in this crisis.  As you know so well from the work that you do, faith community leaders all across the spectrum, from World Vision to Islamic Relief to the American Jewish World Service, have reached out to members in their churches, mosques, and synagogues to raise awareness of the situation in the Horn. 
And through USAID, we have partnered with the Ad Council to produce a campaign called FORWARD – which is aimed at increasing public awareness.  Through the advocacy work of Bread for the World, you know that public awareness is key -- because a public that is aware is a public that acts.

One of the mothers I met at the refugee camp took my hand and asked me to help save her children.  Especially now, as we in America stop to give thanks for all the amazing blessings we have, I hope that everyone in this room will join me in answering her plea.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 October 19, 2011
Remarks by Dr. Biden and the First Lady at Major League Baseball-Joining Forces Event
St. Louis VA Medical Center
St. Louis, Missouri
3:20 P.M. CDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, Commissioner Selig, for that kind introduction.  And thank you to everyone at Major League Baseball for your leadership on behalf of our nation’s veterans and military families all across this country.  Most of all, I want to thank everyone from the Medical Center for welcoming us here to St. Louis.
Now, some of you may know that I’m a big baseball fan -- and I’m a Philly girl.  But I’m really going to set that aside for today -- because we’re really here to honor the veterans and their families.  And I couldn’t be more thrilled to be a part of this special day.
I admire each and every veteran, family member, patient, and staff member here, and I sincerely thank you for your service and your sacrifice.  Each of you, like the veterans across this nation, has chosen to dedicate your life to our country -- and we are honored to be with you here today.
 
Over the past years, the First Lady and I have joined together to explore the issues faced by our military service members and their families -- while they are deployed and after they return home.  In our work and travels, we are always inspired by the commitment of our military service members and truly grateful for what they do for our country.
 
Our military families are proud, strong, and resilient, but their service does come with sacrifice.  This administration has made military families a priority and is working to meet the unique challenges they face.  But this work cannot be done by the government alone.  As a military mom, I know firsthand how a simple act of kindness can make such a difference to a service member or a veteran.  That is why the First Lady and I created Joining Forces -- to recognize, honor, and support our military families.  It is our sacred duty to honor the service of those who sacrifice for our country -- and we can all play a role with a simple act of service.
 
Major League Baseball and so many of your players have stepped up to join forces with us -- using baseball’s platform to help the nation appreciate the sacrifices our military family members make every single day.  I hope that the millions of viewers watching tonight’s game will join us in this effort.  And I thank everyone here for your leadership and your example.
 
And now it is my pleasure to introduce my dear friend and partner, and a wonderful advocate for all military families and veterans -- our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.  Sit down, rest yourselves.  Thank you for that warm welcome.  We are truly thrilled to be here today.  And Jill and I are very happy to be making our husbands jealous, too -- (laughter) -- because what are we doing?  We're at the World Series!  And where are they?  We don't really know.  (Laughter.)  But they're not very happy. 
So we're thrilled to be here.  And I want to start by thanking Jill not just for her kind introduction, but for being such a dear friend and just a true partner.  As a military mom  -- we come from this from different angles.  She is from a military family and I'm, like most Americans, not connected to the military directly.  So we've made a tremendous partnership here in terms of our approach and our understanding.  And we wouldn't be here without her tireless advocacy and her passion for this issue.  So let's give Jill another round of applause.  (Applause.)
And I have to say just a huge thank you to Commissioner Selig and to Sue and to Tim and to Major League Baseball.  As Jill said, just the focused and committed support that Major League Baseball has shown to veterans and military families and to our troops has just been tremendous.  And it has been organization-wide -- every player, every team, every official from top to bottom has been on board in an extremely passionate way. 
So I just want to thank you all for not just sponsoring this event, but for making our veterans and military families the focus of tonight's game.  Thank you for what you do every day to support our VA hospitals, our veterans and military families across the country through the incredible "Welcome Back, Veterans" program.  It is a shining example of what we want this country to do for the men and women who have served us so well, and their families.  This is exactly what we had in mind when Jill and I started Joining Forces. 
The idea behind Joining Forces is very simple:  We know that when our men and women in uniform are called to serve, their families serve, too, so their sacrifice is their families’ sacrifice.  And we say this a lot -- family members don't wear uniforms.  It's hard to see them in a crowd, and it's hard to know the challenges and the struggles that they face. 
Jill and I have had the pleasure of traveling around the country, listening to their stories, understanding all that they go through to make it possible for their family members to serve our country.  So their sacrifice is something that we must highlight.  And even if we’re not a part of a military family, we are all a part of the American family.  So every single one of us has an obligation to recognize, honor and support the men and women who protect us, and the families who love them.  They can't serve without those families having their backs. 
And that’s what Jill and I and the folks at Major League Baseball want to do here today.  We wanted to come here today to say thank you.  We wanted to thank you for your service, your sacrifice, your patriotism -- because we know just how extraordinary you are.  That's what all this attention is about.  We know how extraordinary you are. 
Jill and I have had the privilege of visiting with wounded warriors like all of you at places like this all across the country.  And no matter how badly folks have been injured, or whatever they're struggling with, no matter how much pain they’re in, the beauty is you never scale back your dreams.  That's what we see.  You never scale back your dreams. 
You're making plans.  You're re-imagining futures.  And this is particularly true when you see young people who were wounded.  But they're telling us that they’re not just going to walk again, but they’re going to run.  And many of them are going to run marathons. 
I mean, you all motivate us.  And all of you –- and your families –- are right there every step of the way.  The families are by each other's side, pushing, encouraging, reminding with your presence every day, with your love, just what you have to look forward to. 
Every day, you all inspire us.  And that's really what has led Jill and I to be so passionate about this issue.  We want the country to know your stories.  We want the country to know of your sacrifice.  Because if they know, then we all can't help but step up.  And that's what we want this country to do.  By shining a light on these events, with Major League Baseball shining a light on these events, we want America to know that everyone can do something; everyone should do something.  Every business, every church, every individual, every school, every teacher -- we should all know who are the military families in our midst and find out what they need and step up and provide that.
Joining Forces is just a way to galvanize all of that energy and goodwill that's already out there, to shine that light and to lift up these stories and these efforts all throughout the country.  And our hope is that ultimately you all feel this on the ground.  This isn't just for the cameras.  Our goal is to find out whether you feel like you have the support of this country.  And you should feel that every single day.
So we will keep working until the answer from all of you is, absolutely, yes. 
We are just so proud and so grateful and so honored to be here.  So I'm going to stop talking so that we can actually come down and spend some time and shake some hands.  So thank you so much.  And just keep doing what you're doing.  God bless.  (Applause.) 
END
3:30 P.M. CDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 October 17, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces Heroes at Home 1,000 Rebuild Event
New York Avenue Home Build Site
Washington, D.C.
11:57 A.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN: Thank you, David, for that introduction. And thank you for your continued work on behalf of our military families and veterans. And thanks, too, to Gary for all of the great work that Rebuilding Together is doing around the country to support veterans through projects just like this one.
And most of all, I want to thank Sergeant Johnny Agbi for welcoming us to his home today, and for this incredible commitment and service to our nation.
Sergeant Agbi, I know I speak for everyone here today when I say, you are a true hero. (Applause.) You and all of your fellow veterans and service members from across the country show us every day what words like "strength" and "courage" mean. And, of course, we're also grateful to your family members for their service to our country.
Projects like today's build represent some of the incredible ways that communities are coming together to support our veterans and military families all across the United States. And these projects, and all the partners and volunteers who make them possible, embody the spirit of the Joining Forces Initiative that the First Lady and I launched earlier this year.
So thank you to everyone for being here today. And now, it's my honor and a true privilege to introduce a true advocate for all of our veterans and military families -- my friend, our wonderful First Lady, Michelle Obama. (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA: Good morning.
AUDIENCE: Good morning.
MRS. OBAMA: How's it going?
AUDIENCE: Good.
MRS. OBAMA: It's exciting. We're honored to be here. I want to thank Gary Officer from Rebuilding Together, and David Works from Sears Holdings for their leadership and for being here today. And of course, I want to thank my partner in crime, Jill Biden. We have done a lot together on this effort. We've traveled everywhere from North Carolina to Colorado to New Hampshire for Joining Forces. But I have to say it’s good to be right here in our own backyard, just a quick commute down the street.
And no matter where we are, one of our goals with Joining Forces is really to use what we have to shine a light not only on the incredible service of America’s military families who give our nation so much, but also on those Americans -- like all of you -- who are stepping up in so many important ways to give something back to these men and women and their families.
And that’s exactly what’s happening here today with these two wonderful announcements. First, we’re marking the 1,000th home that Sears and Rebuilding Together have refitted for our wounded warriors through the Heroes at Home Project. And that is a very impressive accomplishment and you all should be just so proud -- 1,000 homes. (Applause.)
And on top of that, Sears Holdings is pledging to increase the number of military family members in its workforce by 10 percent. I mean, that’s incredible. That's exactly what we're hoping to see happen. It means that more than 30,000 troops, veterans, and military spouses will be working at Sears. And it’s only the latest commitment that the Sears team has made. They have been working with us at Joining Forces since the very beginning. And we look forward to working with them even more, but more importantly, for them to serve as an example of how America’s businesses can look out for our heroes, particularly during these tough economic times.
And all of this is just amazing. It represents the best that our country has to offer. And just think about what those kind of numbers actually mean. Just think about the lives that are changed. Think about the renewed sense of security that each family feels because mom or dad just got hired; how the wounded warrior whose life is transformed by a refurbished home. Just think about what that new front door, that broader, wider front door means -- it's no longer an obstacle; the stairway that is no longer an adversary; the building that’s no longer just a house, but it's now become a home.
And then you take all that hope and all that change and you multiply it by 1,000. That’s what's happening here today. And that's why today is so big, and that's why Jill and I wanted to be a part of this very special day.
And that’s really what Joining Forces is all about. That’s what we were hoping to accomplish. Jill and I started this initiative to help marshal all of this country’s goodwill into something concrete -- something that folks like Johnny can feel in their daily lives. And let me tell you, from just briefly spending time with Johnny and his family, he is an amazing -- amazing -- young man deserving of everything that is happening here today -- kindness of spirit, a positivity. He’s got a strange sense of humor, too. (Laughter.) That’s good. I’m getting you back for that one. (Laughter.) He had us write on the wall, sign it, and then right when we were finished he was like, "Wrong spot." (Laughter.) It's very funny.
So we are grateful to Johnny and his family for all their service and sacrifice. And so, we’re also grateful for companies like Sears, organizations like Rebuilding Together, and more importantly, the volunteers like all of you who are here today for really leading the way, because none of this could happen without volunteers. I mean, I know you have been here for many, many weeks -- Johnny said many of you had become like family. And that’s really what this is all about.
And it’s important during this time to also highlight that each of you is giving back in a way that makes sense for you. And by that I mean Rebuilding Together already knows how to refurbish homes; they’re just figuring out how to do it for veterans. Sears needs effective, committed employees, so they’re turning that need into opportunity for thousands of veterans and military family members by hiring some of the most highly skilled, dedicated individuals this country has to offer.
And as we heard, this isn’t just about doing the right thing; it’s about doing what makes the best business sense. That’s why it makes sense. And for volunteers who have the time and the talent to give -- what you all are doing is directing all of that wonderful energy toward your neighbors and your fellow citizens who have given this nation so much.
So all of this is exactly the message of Joining Forces. We’re not asking anyone to do anything extraordinary. We’re not asking people to start a brand new organization, or to raise or spend millions of dollars. We just want everyone to ask themselves one simple question -- (baby starts to cry) -- now, he’s really cute. (Laughter.) And he’s been very good.
But we have -- we’re just asking people to ask one simple question, and that is: “What can I do?” That’s really the question out there -- “What can I do?” And then we need you to get out there and actually do it. And that’s what makes today so special.
But even with all the wonderful work going on here today, we also know that we’ve got so much more work to do. Today is not the finish line, even though it’s the 1,000th home. Instead, it’s a mile marker. Jill and I are not going to stop until every American -- every single American in this country -- is joining forces with our military families. Our hope, at the very least, is that these families know how much we appreciate their service. Sometimes it’s as simple as a thank you. Sometimes it’s as simple as a basic stop by to visit, go grocery shopping, to spend some time so that these individuals and their families know that their sacrifice was not in vain.
We want every single company out there -- every single one -- to figure out how they can do something, or do more. Every single organization, we want them to step up in some way. Every school, every faith community, and every citizen -- we want everyone to do something. Not something grand, just something. Anything to show the support in a way that is worthy of the strength, courage, and sacrifice of our troops and their families.
A day like today reminds all of us just how possible that goal is. This is happening everywhere, all over the country. And we just need to lift it up so that we remind ourselves how great we are as a nation, and how, when people fall on times when they need support, there are thousands of us -- millions of us -- ready to step up and lend a hand.
So I want to thank you all. Thank you, once again. Thank you for having us here at this glorious day. Thank you for your accomplishments and for your achievements. And thank you for being a model of what we want the rest of the country to do.
So Jill and I are going to keep joining forces, and we hope that you continue to do the same, and call on others in your neighborhoods and your families and your communities to do the same as well.
Thank you all, and congratulations. (Applause.)
END
12:08 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 13, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and President Lee at a State Luncheon
The State Department
Washington, D.C.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Madam Secretary, thank you very much.  President Lee, Mrs. Kim, members of your delegation, to all the distinguished guests in this great room here this afternoon.  My wife, Jill, and I are delighted -- or I should say it the other way:  I’m Jill’s husband, we are delighted to be here.  It’s a great honor to join Secretary Clinton in hosting our friends from the Republic of Korea.
As the Secretary has already stated, today we’re here to celebrate our close ties, Mr. President, our shared values and the partnership that we have built together.
To state the obvious, this is not a new partnership, but an old friendship rooted in mutual respect, and a history of shared sacrifice.  Our alliance, forged in war, is now a cornerstone of peace, security and prosperity for all of Northeast Asia.
Mr. President, I noted that two years ago when we took office and three years ago when you took office, both you and President Obama made the same pledge.  You made a pledge that you would strengthen the strategic alliance with the United States of America.  As President Obama said when he took office that he planned on -- strengthening the pledge, the alliance with the Republic of Korea.
I don't think it’s an overstatement to suggest that you have succeeded.  Thanks to your leadership and that of President Obama, the alliance between the United States and the Republic of Korea is the strongest it has ever been.
We’re working shoulder-to-shoulder on many common problems.  And increasingly, these problems are global challenges.  And increasingly, the Republic of Korea, as the Secretary stated, is playing a global role.
One example of that is that you will host the nuclear summit next year to help further our shared commitment to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, reduce nuclear arsenals and secure nuclear materials.
And from our discussions this morning in the Oval Office, I know we share the hope that the participating countries will come to Seoul ready to deliver on pledges they made in Washington last year, and to build on those pledges.
We also know, Mr. President, for you and for your fellow countrymen, nuclear security is not some abstract concept.  Together, we have built an international sanctions regime that impedes proliferation and constrains North Korea’s nuclear missile programs.  But together we also remain willing to engage in meaningful talks -- meaningful talks -- with North Korea with the shared goals of denuclearization and the reduction of tensions on the peninsula and in the region.
Finally, we celebrate perhaps our greatest achievement yet.  Last night, as a consequence of the hard work of your negotiators and Ambassador Kirk and many others, the United States Congress voted to approve the U.S.-Korea free trade agreement.  And I know from our discussions today it is our mutual hope that your national assembly will ratify it very soon, and this agreement will be recognized by all as a win for both of us, and bring the world’s first and 12th largest economies even closer together.
Madam Secretary, many people have known that President Lee’s nickname is the Bulldozer.  (Laughter.)  I wondered how in the Lord’s name he got that nickname.  He doesn't look like an American linebacker in the National Football League to me.  (Laughter.)  But his persistence exceeds any linebacker that ever hit me.  (Laughter.)  But I want you all to know what you may not know and that is the origin of the nickname.  I’m told that earlier in his career, President Lee once completely -- completely dismantled, took apart and reassembled a bulldozer in order to figure out how to make it work better and improve it. 
And knowing you from before, Mr. President, when I heard that story it strangely did not surprise me.  (Laughter.)  For those who know you much better than I, it’s no surprise either because it’s a story as a testament to your unyielding perseverance but your incredible patience -- breaking down problems to the nuts and bolts and sometimes literally -- in order to do that, in order to develop practical and lasting solutions.
From my perspective in Washington, that's exactly what you’ve done, Mr. President, as President.  You have the ability to overcome obstacles and inspire others to do the same, and it’s helped us.  It’s helped us to find and reach so many goals together.
Now, Mr. President, let me offer a toast to your leadership:  To our partnership, which serves the interest of both our great nations now and into the future, and to all of those who have worked so tirelessly to make real our shared vision, thank you, Mr. President, and welcome.
(A toast is offered.)
Mr. President, let me invite you to make some remarks.  (Applause.)
PRESIDENT LEE:  (As interpreted.)  First of all, Mr. Vice President and Madam Secretary, let me just explain and add a little bit to the story about my nickname Bulldozer.  (Laughter.)  The bulldozer that I dismantled down to the nuts and bolts, that was a Caterpillar bulldozer.  (Laughter and applause.)  And also, let me remind you, ladies and gentlemen, this was a brand new Caterpillar bulldozer.  (Laughter.) 
Well, Mr. Vice President, Dr. Biden, Madam Secretary, thank you very much for inviting all of us here to this lovely room and giving us this opportunity.  I’m also very happy to see so many business community leaders represented here from both Korea and the United States.  And I know -- and let me assume that all of you here are friends of Korea, which makes this occasion that much more meaningful.
Ladies and gentlemen, I consider both Vice President Biden and Secretary Clinton as my very, very close friends.  And, first of all, with regards to Vice President Biden, I know that in 2008, immediately or soon after I was elected President of Korea that he led the move to unanimously adopt a congratulatory resolution congratulating me on my election as President.  I think this is the first time that I am thanking you in person, Mr. Vice President.  So let me use this opportunity to say thank you, sir.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  It was an honor.
PRESIDENT LEE:  (As interpreted.)  And, ladies and gentlemen, Secretary Clinton has always been a friend of Korea.  And ever since she assumed her important role as Secretary of State, I know that one of the first countries that she visited was the Republic of Korea during her Asian trip. 
I remember it was February of 2009 when I had the pleasure and privilege of receiving her in Seoul.  And we had very good and constructive talks while she was visiting Korea back then and of course after that as well.  Secretary Clinton has always been a staunch supporter of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and of course in Northeast Asia.  
And, ladies and gentlemen, last night as you all know the Korea-U.S. free trade agreement was ratified by both houses of Congress.  And we’re of course very happy about that.  And I was having dinner in fact with President Obama and Secretary Clinton was also there.  And as we were having dinner, it was President Obama who was looking at his Blackberry and told me -- and gave -- and broke the news that finally the KORUS FTA was ratified by the U.S. Congress while we were having dinner. 
And so when I heard those news -- of course, I was very happy to hear those news, but also very -- I felt kind of sorry, because I knew that the members of Congress were skipping dinner in order to resolve this issue.  (Laughter.)   So of course, I was very thankful and also sorry for the members of the Congress.  (Applause.) 
So, ladies and gentlemen, I take this opportunity to thank once again, first of all, the congressional leadership for helping us ratify this very important agreement.  I thank all the members of Congress and both houses for their support.  I, of course, thank President Obama, Vice President Biden and Secretary Clinton, and everyone else in the administration who for many years have tirelessly pursued this goal and finally made it into fruition.  So thank you very much.  (Applause.)
And also, ladies and gentlemen, how could we all forget the hard work that has been put in by the members of the business communities of both Korea and the United States.  Again, I take this opportunity to convey my deepest gratitude to all of you here.  (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, based upon our own experience of entering into and implementing free trade agreements, we know from experience that free trade agreements lead to doubling and sometimes tripling and quadrupling the amount of trade and investments going into each others’.  And also, what’s more important is the fact that FTAs lead to creation of good, decent jobs, and it spurs growth and innovation and entrepreneurship. 
And, of course, now that have the FTA ratified by both houses of Congress here, it is now up to the business community of Korea and the United States to fully utilize and take advantage of what is a very good model free trade agreement.
And also, Secretary Clinton, I almost forgot, but I must thank you because -- thank you for your hard work in making this possible -- to have an American pavilion being present at the Yeosu Expo.  Thank you very much for that.  And, of course, my gratitude goes out to the American companies who have decided to take part.
In all honesty, Madame Secretary and Mr. Vice President, I was very concerned because we have about 100 plus companies and countries taking part in the Yeosu Expo, but I was concerned that the United States wasn’t one of them.  But now, I can be relieved that that is not the case.  (Laughter.)
Mr. Vice President, Madame Secretary, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, we are really commemorating the 60th anniversary of an enduring alliance between the Republic of Korea and the United States.  Of course, this alliance began 60 years ago as a military-political alliance.  But now, today, we can safely say that this alliance has entered into a new phase.  We are beginning a new 60 years -- a 60-year mark.  This is truly a historic achievement.  And, also, ladies and gentlemen, please be proud of the achievements that both of our countries have made over the last 60 years through our partnership and through our friendship.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the 21st century of course we have many, many challenges, and often many of them are very serious.  And, of course, it requires our cooperation between the U.S. and the Republic of Korea.  But, ladies and gentlemen, I’m confident that we will work together and we will come out stronger by overcoming these many challenges.  And, of course, we reaffirmed this pledge between Korea and the United States during my morning meeting with President Obama. 
So once again, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.  Thank you, Mr. Vice President.  Thank you, Madame Secretary, for this wonderful occasion and invitation, and my special thanks to all the business community leaders here.  Thank you, very much.  (Applause.)
END                         
1:56 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 11, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at the Pentagon 9/11 10th Anniversary Commemoration
The Pentagon
10:00 A.M. EDT
    
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Good morning.  Mr. Secretary, it’s I’m the one who is honored to be given the privilege to speak at such an important memorial ceremony.
Admiral Mullen, Speaker Boehner, members of our armed forces and above all, the family members gathered in front of me who suffered such a grievous loss here 10 years ago today.  My wife, Jill, and I want you to know our heart goes out to you.
And those of you who survived that cowardly act, I say it again, I’m the one that's honored to be here with you.  To the family members, I know what it’s like to receive that call out of the blue, that the dearest thing in your life is gone.  I know these memorials -- and you’ve been through many -- are bittersweet moments for you because as you sit here right now, unlike a month ago, everything has come back in stark relief.  It’s not a thought.  It’s precise.  You remember that God-awful empty feeling you remember being sucked into your own chest, that feeling of hollowness.  So I want you to know that I personally believe that the courage you’re showing today is remarkable.  It’s hard to come back.  You have that sense of overwhelming pride and love and devotion, but also that feeling of “oh, my God.”
But I want you to know something else, your physical presence here today gives hope to thousands of Americans who under different circumstances are trying to come to grips with the losses that you had that they're going through.  Because when they see -- they see you here, you let them know that hope can grow from tragedy, and that there can be a second life.
My mom used to say, Joe, at everything terrible something good will come if you look hard enough for it.  In the beginning there’s no way to believe that.  You’re living proof to those people who are still scrambling and looking for that hope that it’s possible.
So let me say that our thoughts -- Jill’s thoughts, mine, the whole nation’s thoughts and prayers are with those who also were wounded in this attack last night -- wounded in an attack last night in Wardak Province, a stark and vivid reminder this war continues.  The courage, determination and the sacrifices of our forces in Afghanistan and around the world is literally astounding.  I’ll have a little more to say about that in just a moment.
Ladies and gentlemen, milestones are especially -- and especially those that are tragic -— compel us to reflect and to remember, to honor and, with God’s help, to heal because that's what this is ultimately about.
And so today, above all else, we recall 148 [sic] lives cut short on this site 10 years ago this morning -— lives that touched every aspect of our national endeavor: a Marine who lost his leg, and nearly his life, in Vietnam but who used what he called a “second chance” to become a father of five; a three-year-old passenger aboard that fateful flight, who held her stuffed “lambie” each night, as her parents read her bedtime stories; the secretary who worked for American Airlines for 45 years, whose colleagues considered her a second mother, and who dressed as Mrs. Claus each Christmas; the Navy physicist, whose wife said after his death: “He was a wonderful dancer.  I’ll never be able to dance with anybody else.  He was a perfect partner.  And above all, he was a good, caring and loving man.”
And so, so many others are remembered this morning with the moments of silence in small towns and bustling cities all across this country.  But nowhere are the memories more immediate, more vivid, more compelling, more real than in New York City; Shanksville, Pennsylvania and right here in Northern Virginia at the Pentagon.
Although words cannot ease the pain of these losses -— paying tribute by recalling not just the horror of that day but the heroism as well can hopefully give you some comfort and stiffen the resolve of this nation.
At 9:36 a.m., thousands of patriotic Americans were going about their daily business in the building behind me, in this great citadel of our national defense.  And one minute later, 9:37 a.m., an unconscionable tragedy struck.
But what happened -- what happened after that was far more remarkable than the damage inflicted in the building behind me. Those who worked in this building, many of you in front of me, and thousands more first responders across the region --firefighters from Arlington County, Fairfax County, Montgomery County, the District of Columbia and many others, they sprang to action, risking their lives so their friends, their colleagues and total strangers, people they had never met, might live.
From corporals to cafeteria workers, right up the chain of the command to the top brass, to Secretary Rumsfeld, who I pay special tribute today; I understand he is here.  Secretary Rumsfeld himself did what he did as a young soldier, a young man, and did all his life -- you and he and others streamed into that breach between the 4th and 5th corridors, where the devastation was the greatest, where death came in an instant, but also where there were survivors to be found.
Specialist Beau Doboszenski was a tour guide that morning, on the far side of the building -— so far away, in fact, he never heard the plane hit.  But he shortly felt the commotion.  He could have gone home -— no one would have blamed him.  But he was also a trained EMT and came from a family of firefighters. So when people started streaming out of the building and screaming, he sprinted toward the crash site.  For hours, he altered between treating his co-workers and dashing into the inferno with a team of six men.
Micky Fyock, a volunteer fire chief in Woodsboro, Maryland, 60 miles away, after working all day, when he heard that evening that the rescue workers at the Pentagon needed a fire truck -- a small fire truck, small enough to fit through tight places, he knew he had a ‘54 Mack, which was the smallest one around.  So fresh off an all-day shift, he barreled down the highway and battled the blaze all night with thousands of others.
And at dawn, exhausted and covered with soot -- with soot, 14 hours on the job, he sat on a bench and confronted [sic] a man -- a man who he said was wondering aloud, why am I still alive for had I not been at the dentist, I would have been in the office, my office, totally destroyed, with my colleagues gone.  Why me?
It’s a basic American instinct to respond to crises when help is needed, to confront [sic] the afflicted.   An American instinct summoned by the collective strength of the American people that we see come to the fore in our darkest hours, an instinct that echoes through the ages -— from Pearl Harbor, to Beirut; from Mogadishu to Ground Zero; Flight 93 to right here in the Pentagon.
Those in this building that day knew what they were witnesses.  It was a declaration of war by stateless actors -- bent on changing our way of life -- who believed that these horrible acts of terror -- these horrible acts of terror directed against innocents could buckle our knees, could bend our will, could being to break us and break our resolve.
But they did not know us.  Instead, that same American instinct that sent all of you into the breach between the 4th and 5th corridors, galvanized an entire new generation of patriots —- the 9/11 Generation.
Many of them were just kids on that bright September morning.  But like their grandparents on December 7, 1941, they courageously bore the burden that history had placed on their shoulders.
And as they came of age, they showed up -- they showed up to fight for their country, and they're still showing up.  Two million, eight hundred thousand of that 9/11 Generation moved to join our military since the attacks on 9/11, to finish the war begun here that day.
And they joined -- they joined knowing that they were in all likelihood going to be deployed in harm’s way -— and in many cases deployed multiple, multiple times in Afghanistan and Iraq and other dangerous parts of the world.
Those of you, Admiral, who command this building turned this generation, this 9/11 Generation into the finest group of warriors the world has ever known.
Over a decade at war, they pioneered new tactics, mastered new languages, developed and employed advanced new technologies.  They took on responsibilities once reserved only for those with considerably more seniority -— responsibilities that extended beyond the base or the battlefield to the politics of Afghanistan, to the politics of Iraq, to the economies of those countries, and to the development tasks that ultimately will lay the groundwork for us to leave behind stable countries that will not threaten us.
And along with the intelligence community and the law enforcement community, they relentlessly took the fight to al Qaeda and its affiliates.  They were prepared to follow bin Laden to the hell’s gate if necessary.  And they got him.
My God do we owe those special ops folks and intelligence guys who got him, many of whom have subsequently lost their lives.  But we will not stop -— you will not stop —- until al Qaeda is not only disrupted, but completely dismantled and ultimately destroyed.
And one more thing about this 9/11 generation of warriors -- never before in our history has America asked so much, over such a sustained period, of an all-volunteer force.  So I can say without fear of contradiction, or being accused of exaggeration, the 9/11 Generation ranks among the greatest our nation has ever produced.  And it was born -- it was born -- it was born right here on 9/11.  (Applause.)
And as the Admiral said, that generation has paid an incredible price -— 4,478 fallen angels in Iraq and 1,648 in Afghanistan, and more than 40,000 wounded in both countries, some who will require care and support the rest of their lives.
Having visited them multiple times like many of you, I am awed not only by their capability, but their sacrifice today and every day. 
The terrorists who attacked the Pentagon, as Leon said, sought to weaken America by shattering this defining symbol of our military might and prowess.  But they failed.  And they also failed for another reason, not just physically failed.  They failed because they continue to fundamentally misunderstand us, as they misunderstood us on that day.  For the true source of American power does not lie within that building because as Americans, we draw our strength from the rich tapestry of our people -- just looking at the people before me, looking at the families before me.
The true legacy of 9/11 is that our spirit is mightier, the bonds that unite us are thicker, and the resolve is firmer than the million tons of limestone and concrete that make up that great edifice behind me.
Al Qaeda and bin Laden never imagined that the 3,000 people who lost their lives that day would inspire 3 million to put on the uniform and harden the resolve of 300 million Americans.  They never imagined the sleeping giant they were about to awaken.
They never imagined these things because they did not understand what enables us, what has always enabled us to withstand any test that comes our way.  But you understood.  You knew better than anyone because you knew every time this nation has been attacked -- you particularly who wear the uniform -- every time this nation is attacked, you knew it only emboldens us to stand up and to strike back.
But you family members, you also knew something else that a lot of us didn't know that day, that your loved ones, those who you lost, who we now call heroes, were already heroes.  They were already heroes to you.
They were the father that tucked you in at night.  They were the wife who knew your fears before even before you expressed them.  They were the brother who lifted you up.  They were the daughter who made you laugh, and the son who made you proud.  I know.  I know in my heart, so do all of the people on this stage know, that they are absolutely irreplaceable -- absolutely irreplaceable.
As the Speaker heard me say yesterday in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, no memorial, no ceremony, no words will ever fill the void left in your hearts by their loss.  My prayer for you is that, 10 years later, when you think of them -- 10 years later when you think of them that it brings a smile to your lips before it brings a tear to your eye.
My mom used to say that courage lies in every man’s heart, and her expectation was that one day -- one day it would be summoned.  Well, here, on September 11, 2001, at exactly 9:37 a.m., it was summoned.  It was summoned from the hearts of the thousands of people who worked here to save hundreds.  It was summoned in the hearts of all those first responders who answered the call.  For courage lies deepest in and beats the loudest in the heart of Americans.  Don't forget it.  We will not forget them.
May God bless you all.  May God bless America.  And most of all, may God protect our Troops.  (Applause.)
END
10:20 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 10, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joseph Biden at Dedication of Flight 93 Memorial
Shanksville, Pennsylvania
  2:25 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Americans, I’m honored to be standing here today, standing with two former Presidents. 
President Clinton, as he said, the passengers on Flight 93 knew that our common humanity is what united us most.  Well, Mr. President, the same can be said of you.  You spent your time as President, and the years since, deeply committed to embracing and strengthening our common humanity.  (Applause.)  And, Mr. President, we all thank you for what you’ve done and what you continue to do.   
Let me also recognize a man responsible for bringing our country together at a time when it could have been torn apart, for making it clear that America could not be brought to her knees, and helping us stand tall and strike back -- President George W. Bush.  (Applause.)  In the darkest hour of our generation, your voice and leadership, Mr. President, helped us find our way.  And for that, you deserve our gratitude for a long, long time.  (Applause.) 
And I say now to the families that are gathered here today, I know what it’s like to receive that call out of the blue, like a bolt out of the blue.  And I know this is a bittersweet moment for you.  And I want to tell you, you have a lot more courage than I had.  You have a lot more courage just by being here today, because I know, and many others know, how hard it is to relive these moments, because it brings everything back in stark, stark relief and stark detail.  
But I also know, like your loved ones, what you probably don’t know, that you are literally an inspiration to the thousands of people across this country who right now are feeling the loss of an intense tragedy that they’re suffering.  They know, looking at you, watching you on television today, that there’s hope to be found after tragedy, that there’s rebirth in the face of death.  You, in a sense, are as courageous as your family members were.  And we owe you all for being here today, just the act of being here.  (Applause.) 
We’re here today to remember and honor 40 men and women who gave their lives so others could live theirs -- decent, honorable women and men who never imagined 10 years ago tomorrow that when they said goodbye to their children, when they kissed their loved ones goodbye and walked through that door, that they were doing it for the very last time.
They didn’t know the horror that awaited them, but they confronted unimaginable fear and terror with a courage that has been summoned only by the truest and the rarest of American heroes -- 40 names etched on each of those panels on the wall, the Wall of Names.  But, more than that, their names are going to be, as President Bush said, etched forever into American history.  They join an incredibly elite list of women and men, and a long history filled with ordinary Americans doing extraordinary things -- men and women of undaunted courage, uncommon resolve, and a stubborn perseverance in the face of unfathomable challenge.
We teach our children that these are qualities ingrained into our national character as Americans.  And I believe they are.  They animate our national identity.  And I believe they will continue to define America, because of the example of the men and women who we pay tribute today, the passengers and the crew of Flight 93. 
None of them asked for what happened.  They didn’t go on that plane -- they didn’t board that plane to fight a war.  But when they heard the news, when they found out what happened in New York, they knew that they were going through, it was something more than a hijacking.  They knew it was the opening shot in a new war. 
And so, they acted.  They acted as citizen patriots have acted since the beginning of our country.  They stood up and they stood their ground.  They thought, like Captain Parker said at Lexington, and I quote him, “If they mean to have a war, let it begin here.”
As many times as I recall, and all of you who are not family members like me, have recalled this incident time and again over the last 10 years, I never fail to be astonished, literally astonished by the courage they demonstrated.
And so, we stand where it began.  We think of them.  We think of our nation.  We think of our history and we think of the future.  And we think of it, because of them, with a confidence knowing that ordinary citizens will continue to stare down fear, overwhelm evil, and bring forth hope from what seems to be none.  And although it will continue to amaze us and inspire us when it happens, it should not surprise us.  For that heroism is who we are.  And that courage lies deepest and beats loudest in the heart of this nation.
We know that these 40 men and women were more than ordinary Americans to all of you sitting in front of me.  They were more than passengers and crews.  They were already heroes.  They were already heroes to you.  
They were the father that tucked you in bed at night.  They were the wife who knew your fears before you even expressed them.  They were the brother who lifted you up.  They were the daughter who made you laugh.  They were the son who made you proud.  They are irreplaceable.  I know that.  We know that. 
And we know, and I know, that no memorial -- no words, no acts -- can fill the void that they left in your hearts.  My prayer for you is that 10 years later, their memory is able to bring a smile to your lips before it brings a tear to your eye.  And I hope you take comfort in knowing that a grateful nation understands that your loved ones gave their lives in pursuit of the noblest of earthly goals:  defending their country, defending their families, sacrificing their lives so we could live ours.  Those of us who were in Washington that day, without knowing it for sure at the time, now know we owe them an overwhelming special, personal debt of gratitude. 
The collective spirit of your mother, your father, your brother, your husband, your wife, your sister, your best friend -- that spirit lives on not only in you, but in your country.  It lives on in the Cross of Steel made from the World Trade Center beams, placed on a Pentagon-shaped platform that rests proudly outside the Shanksville Volunteer Fire Department.  (Applause.)  That Cross of Steel is an enduring symbol of the steel and the spine of this region, and the spine of this country. 
And it definitely lives on in a new generation of warriors -- the 9/11 Generation, inspired by what happened here, 2.8 million young Americans since 9/11, that 9/11 generation, have joined the United States Armed Forces -- thousands giving their lives and tens of thousands being wounded to finish the war that began right here.
Maya Angelou wrote, and I quote, “History, despite its wrenching pain, cannot be unlived.  However, if faced with courage, need not be lived again.”
Ladies and gentlemen -- we are not here to unlive history.  We are here to honor those whose courage made history and is going to inspire generations of Americans to come.
So, I say to you, even as we struggle with this tragedy, even as we grapple with the profound loss and devastating grief, we can look up at the heavens and think of these heroes and know, know with certitude that there is not a single, solitary tragedy that America cannot overcome.  There is not a single moment of hardship that cannot be transformed into one of national strength.  The seeds of doubt, planted by those who wish to harm us, will instead grow into flowering meadows like this one where we stand in today, for they cannot defeat the American spirit.  We know this with certainty.  We know it with certainty, because it’s the history of the journey of this country at every stage of our history.  (Applause.)
As President Clinton knows, my mother used to say, “Courage lies in every heart.”  And she would go on to say, “And the expectation is that, Joey, one day it will be summoned.”  “Courage lies in every heart, and one day it will be summoned.”  On September 11, 2001, at 9:57 a.m., it was summoned and 40 incredible men and women answered the call.  They gave their lives and, in doing so, gave this country a new life. 
We owe them.  We owe you a debt we can never repay.  Thank you all.  Thank you, family members.  And may God bless you.  And may God protect our troops.  (Applause.) 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 23, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at Sendai Airport
Sendai Airport
Sendai, Japan
3:22 P.M. (Local) 
 
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Governor, thank you very much.  Come to Delaware.  It’s a lovely place.  How many students were scheduled to go to visit my home state of Delaware?  Raise your hand.  You’ve still got to come.  My granddaughters are anxious to see you.
 
Governor, thank you for that kind introduction.  And I am honored and truly humbled to have an opportunity to visit this place that has seen so much devastation and tragedy but also demonstrated for the world to see so much heroism and courage, resolve and selflessness.
 
If there was ever a single set of circumstances for the world to understand what the Japanese people are made of -- their resolve, their determination, their brotherhood, it was this God awful tragedy that you have had to go through.  I came to express not only my commitment to say we will do whatever we can to help, but to tell you how much the President, how much I, how much the American people admire your character.
 
I see this is simultaneous translation.  (Laughter.) 
 
On March 11th, when the earth shook and the ocean surged, the thoughts and prayers of the entire world turned toward Japan, a great and peaceful nation that has always been there when others have needed you.  It’s something I think sometimes the Japanese people forget as they express their gratitude to us and others, you have always been there.  You have been there when others have been the victims of the forces of nature.
 
So I wanted to extend my deepest condolences, and those of President Obama and all the American people, for what you have endured, and particularly for the family, friends and loved ones of those of who have been lost.
 
But I am also here to honor the incredible spirit of the Japanese people, who remind the world of something equally as forceful as the force of nature, that is the force of the nature of the human spirit, which is equally as formidable, particularly when we join together in the most trying of times.
 
I’ll have a chance later this afternoon to visit the community center that is now the home for hundreds of families left homeless by the devastation; I’m anxious to meet them.  I’m anxious to hear their stories.  And I’m anxious to let them know America is going nowhere.  We are here as long as you want us to help.
 
But I already know that the disaster met its match in the legendary industriousness and relentless perseverance of the Japanese people.
 
Neighbors and total strangers in this region divided up the tasks essential to survival: scavenging for food wherever they could find it; overcoming downed cellular networks by communicating through message boards, radio and human messengers; gathering fuel from the tanks of the wrecked motor boats and automobiles.
 
We see that same spirit throughout Japan, including the brilliant young Japanese golfer who recently captured the imagination of Americans.  Ryo stood there as that magnificent swing of his and as the announcers pointed out, that he had committed all his earnings to deal with the devastation back home.
 
One eighth grade English teacher I’m told, as school resumed, told her students, and I quote:  “Many of us lost our homes and possessions in an instant.  The important thing is now making a first step toward something brighter.”
 
My dear mother, an old Irish lady used to say, in the most difficult moments, including when I lost my wife and daughter, she said, Joey, out of everything terrible, something good will come if you look hard enough for it.  It’s hard to look for it.  It’s hard to accept that.  But it’s true.  And the DNA of the Japanese people is riddled with the notion that it’s true.
 
Five months after the disaster, while there is still clearly a long way to go, you have made remarkable progress, schools are beginning to re-open, businesses are coming back, homes are being rebuilt.
 
One of the first major steps toward moving forward here in Sendai is specifically here at this airport.  On March 11th, flood waters reached I’m told the second level, almost all the way to this floor.  And when the water receded, it became the home of more than 1,000 weary survivors with nowhere to go.
 
As I stand here at this airport, I am proud -- as I said to your generals -- I’m proud that our military was given the privilege of being able to join your forces.  And within a week of the earthquake, able to re-open the runway that enabled the arrival of hundreds of relief workers and more than 2 million tons of humanitarian supplies.
 
And just a month after the earthquake, on April 13th, the airport reopened to commercial flights.  Indeed, one of the underpublicized but remarkable aspects of the response to this disaster is that the Japan has remained open for business.  It is still open for business.
 
The American people are also proud and honored by the way  they have been able to assist.  They're proud to continue doing whatever you would like us to as you rebuild.  And that’s because of a simple proposition.  It’s not because of government-to-government or military-to-military relations.  It’s because of a genuine affection the American people for the Japanese people.  You students, when you come to my home state, you will see that.  You will feel it.  You will understand it.  But it’s also because we know -- we know if the reverse situation occurred, you’d be there -- you’d be there to help us.  You’d be there to do everything you could.  As you were at Katrina, as you were in Pakistan, as you were around the world, wherever disaster has struck.
 
That’s why within hours, our military launched what we refer to in English as “Operation Friend” -— the single largest humanitarian relief effort in American history.  And it was done without having to convince the American people of anything.  It was spontaneous.  It’s because of the affection for the people -- the people of Japan.  That's the building block upon which this partnership and alliance of ours is built.
 
But this is not just a one-time effort in response to a crisis.  America’s ongoing assistance to Japan’s economic recovery is just as important.  It’s not only important for Japan, it’s important for the United States.  It’s important for the United States that Japan remain open for business and continue to grow, to prosper.  And there is no limit in our view what two of the world’s largest economies, and strongest and most dynamic economies in the history of the world can accomplish together.  I emphasize together.
 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited in April to help launch the broad public-private partnership aimed at revitalizing the economy by helping build better links between this region and the global economy.
 
This is taking shape as a public-private friendship initiative, in essence the sequel to Operation Friendship, to support Japan’s recovery, in part through fellowship and grant programs that support education and innovative business projects, and in many other ways.  But it’s an investment -- it’s an investment, as we see it, in tomorrow’s leaders. 
 
We’re working to enhance the cooperation between Japan and America, between Japanese and American businesses, between our nations’ civil society groups, and among public officials -—including more than 180 American municipalities with Japanese “sister cities.”
 
Look at the 16 young baseball players from right here in Sendai, who have spent the past two weeks in the United States, hosted by Hall of Fame friend of mine named Cal Ripken, as part of a State Department sports exchange program with Japan.
 
America’s commitment to our friend and ally Japan extends well beyond support in times of need and reflects the profound importance America places on our relationship with Japan and our deep ties to this region.
 
The United States is and will remain a Pacific power.  America’s focus on this critical region will only grow in the years to come -— as Asia plays an ever increasing role in the global economy and international affairs.  But the anchor for that relationship will be Japan.
 
As President Obama said in Tokyo, during his first visit to Asia as President, and I quote:  The United States of America may have started as a series of port cities along the Atlantic Ocean, but for generations we have also been a nation of the Pacific.  Asia and the United States are not separated by this great ocean; they are bound by this great ocean.
 
That’s why when President Obama and I came to office two and a half years ago, we were determined to strengthen our partnership and alliance with Japan, which has served as a foundation of this region’s security and prosperity for over half a century.
 
Those nations in the region that are prospering and growing, and we want to see them grow, that has been made possible by the stability and certitude that Japan and the United States have been able to provide over the last 50 years.
 
Rooted in common interests and shared values -— including democratic ideals, respect for human rights, the rule of law -- this alliance always plays an indispensable role in ensuring the security and prosperity of not only Japan and the United States, but, quite frankly, the entire Asia-Pacific region.
 
We are committed to ensuring that it continues to be effective in meeting the challenges of the 21st century.  Toward that end, I was pleased that in June our Secretaries of Defense and State met for the first what we call “2 +2” talks in more than four years, part of our effort to increase security cooperation with Japan in the coming years.
 
Our partnership continues to thrive.  Even as you recover from the earthquake and the tsunami, Japan continues to play a prominent and positive role in world affairs.
 
I just want you to know that we remember and we are aware that whatever and wherever on the planet disaster strikes, Japan has always been among the first to lend a hand and deploy aid workers, generous contributions, essential donations to the recovery of that country or region.
 
When the Indian Ocean tsunami left hundreds of thousands dead or homeless throughout the region, when the earthquake leveled Port-au-Prince, in Haiti, when flood waters ravaged Pakistan, when Hurricane Katrina cut a devastating swath through America’s Gulf Coast, in every one of those instances -- without being asked, and countless others that I have not mentioned, the people of Japan have lent a hand.
 
But as Japan faces its own difficult time, Americans will stand by Japan for as long as it takes.  My visit today is to reinforce and reassert that commitment of an ally to an ally, a friend to a friend.
 
And let me say one last thing.  There are some around the world who are betting on the decline of America and the inability of Japan to rise again.  They are making a very bad bet.  Both of us -- both of us will continue to grow and prosper.  And together -- together we are a significant part of the engine that will allow the world to recover.
 
I thank you for your friendship.  I thank you for giving us the honor of being able to be of whatever assistance we have been so far.  And may God bless the people of Japan and the people of the United States upon whom this relationship is really built.
 
Thank you very, very much.
 
END
3:38 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 23, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Kan
Kantel (Prime Minister’s Office)
Tokyo, Japan
11:17 A.M. (Local)
PRIME MINISTER KAN:  (As translated.)  (Inaudible) I would like to sincerely welcome you, Mr. Vice President.  Since immediately after the March 11th (inaudible) we have been receiving enormous assistance from the United States (inaudible) and we would like to reiterate our gratitude -- the people of Japan would like to reiterate our gratitude (inaudible).  I understand you are scheduled to go to Sendai this afternoon (inaudible) assistance to the people in the (inaudible) affected areas (inaudible) and making great efforts (inaudible).  And we are back in business and for traveling and with (inaudible) and this visit of Mr. Vice President to Japan demonstrates to the world that Japan is open for business and travel, and this is a splendid opportunity to demonstrate that.
Thank you very much.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President [sic], thanks for your hospitality (inaudible).  I came for two reasons.  First of all, I came to express my sympathy -- admiration and support -- the Japanese people have endured the consequences of (inaudible).  Looking at it from afar, it was absolutely breathtakingly -- breathtakingly heartbreaking to see what your people (inaudible).
But I want you to know -- and your Ambassador to the United States knows this because (inaudible) -- the admiration of the American people (inaudible) the resolve, the courage, the commitment of the Japanese people was a model for the whole world to see.  And, Mr. Prime Minister, you do not need to express gratitude to us.  You would do the same for us.
Our only regret is we could not even do more.  That's the first reason why I’m here to express that (inaudible).
And the second reason is in accepting the kind invitation President Hu and Vice President Xi is increasing our dialogue and establish a special relationship with Vice President Xi, I wanted to make it clear that we want these relationships.  We are a Pacific power.  You are a Pacific power.  You are our ally both -- and your power economically and politically is something that we value a great deal.
I make the point that while you’re struggling to deal with one of the greatest natural disasters any country has faced, we are dealing with getting our budget in order.  There are voices in the world who are counting us out.  They're making a very bad bet.
(Pool escorted from event before conclusion.)
END
11:24 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 22, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Mongolian Prime Minister Batbold
2:31 P.M. (Local)

        PRIME MINISTER BATBOLD: (As translated.)  First of all, I’m grateful to the United States Vice President Biden for accepting my invitation to pay an official visit to Mongolia.  And I am pleased to welcome Your Excellency and your delegation to Mongolia.

        This visit is significant as it coincides with a series of important anniversaries in the history of Mongolia.  Next year, we will celebrate the 25th anniversary of bilateral relations.

        Your visit is the expression of the fact that U.S. recognizes Mongolia’s irreversible choice to develop democracy and the will of the Mongolian people and to uphold legal forces to uphold democracy.  We are grateful to the United States for the continued support and the economic assistance.

        It gives me great pleasure to note that we had a very productive meeting with Vice President Biden.  We have discussed the issues related to furthering our bilateral cooperation in the spirit of the comprehensive partnership, based on our common values and shared interests.  We have noted with satisfaction the progress achieved in our relations and affirmed our commitment to advance these relations.

        Mongolia has started chair the Community of Democracies from this July.  I discussed this issue before, when I was a foreign minister with State Secretary Clinton, and today, I had the opportunity to discuss this issue with Vice President Biden, as well.  I would like to highlight that Mongolia is ready to share its experiences in promoting democratic values and culture.

        The successful implementation of Millennium Challenge Corporation projects will significantly reduce poverty, increase transportation -- the Mongolian side has expressed its interest in launching talks in the MCC second compact agreement.

        We have discussed the possibilities to develop and enrich trade and economic relations with the United States and attract more United States investments to Mongolia.  We are grateful that Vice President Biden reaffirmed the continued support of the part of the United States for implementation of democratic reforms and strengthening market economy in Mongolia.  During the meeting, we have discussed possibilities to conclude a transparency agreement in near future.

        The signing of the memorandum of understanding between MIAT Mongolian Airlines and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency aimed at developing civil aviation sector and improving MIAT training and capacity basis would make an important contribution to the development of the bilateral economic cooperation.

        Moreover, we have exchanged our views on other fields of our bilateral cooperation, particularly cooperation in the field of education.  The Mongolian side has requested the United States side to explore the possibilities to increase the number of scholarships for Mongolian students.  This year alone 16 Mongolian students were selected to study in the United States through Fulbright Scholarship Program.

        I expressed our special gratitude on behalf of the people of Mongolia for the U.S. decision to provide $695,000 grant from the Fund for Cultural Preservation.

        We have touched on many issues, particularly in the fruitful views of our bilateral consultation mechanisms.  We have also discussed our cooperation in peacekeeping operations.  The U.S. side has expressed its appreciation for Mongolia’s contribution to the peacekeeping activities.

        Mr. Vice President, there is a proverb saying that an old friend is the best friend.  Therefore, the visit of the U.S. Vice President to Mongolia after 67 years is certainly an old friend’s visit for us.  I welcome you again and wish you a pleasant stay in Mongolia.

        Thank you for your attention.

        VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for the invitation.  And it’s an honor to be here.  I’ve been looking forward to this.  I also want to thank your President, as well as the Mongolian people for their generous hospitality.   I only have one regret that I’m not able to stay longer and see more of your country.  I hope you’ll invite me back.

        I am particularly pleased to make this visit, following your President’s meeting this June with President Obama at the White House.

        Our nation does have a shared history that goes back at least 100 years.  In 1923, a fellow named Roy Chapman Andrews, a naturalist and a explorer, and the Director of the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History in Washington traveled to Mongolia to excavate a site in the Gobi Desert he called the Flaming Cliffs.

        That expedition captured the world’s imagination by discovering a treasure trove of fossils, including the largest mammal to ever walk the Earth and the first dinosaur eggs ever found intact.  But in the last 20 years, Mongolia has captured the imagination of the world by its remarkable transition to democracy: five presidential elections, five democratically conducted parliamentary elections.  And it’s truly remarkable, the progress you’ve made since 1991.

        So although we go back 100 years, quite frankly, we’ve grown much closer since the Mongolian people began to embrace democracy 22 years ago.

        That journey started with a small demonstration of -- on Human Rights Day in 1989, then it blossomed into a movement that inspired thousands of Mongolians.  And it led to the country’s first free elections, and eventually ended -- that eventually ended decades of one-party rule.  

        I guess the translator opposes one-party rule.  (Laughter.)  I’m only kidding.  I shouldn’t joke.  I shouldn’t joke.

        Today Mongolia is not just a shining example for other nations in transition but it’s an emerging leader in the worldwide democratic movement, a responsible actor on the world stage, and a close friend and partner of the United States.  And none of that is an exaggeration.  It is literal.

        In July, as you referenced, Mongolia assumed the chairmanship of the Community of Democracies —- a coalition of democratic countries dedicated to promoting democracy around the world.  And Mongolia’s term as chairman will culminate with a Democratic Summit held in 2013 right here in your capital.

        I also want you and your colleagues to know that Americans admire and appreciate Mongolia’s contributions to international peace and security.  In the past decade alone, Mongolia’s army -— whose proud martial tradition dates to Ghengis Khan -— has been deployed as US [sic] peacekeepers and observers in Sierra Leone, Chad, Darfur, Kosovo, Western Sahara and many other countries.  

        And Mongolian soldiers have also served with the International Coalition Forces in Iraq and are now serving in Afghanistan -- in Afghanistan, where the Mongolian troop contributions will soon increase to nearly 400 military personnel.

        During his June visit -- during his June visit to Washington, your President laid a wreath in the Arlington National Cemetery, and he met with wounded American soldiers at Army Reed Medical Center [sic].  And Americans noticed that gesture.  For not every visiting world leader takes the time to do that.  President Obama and I genuinely and greatly appreciate it.

        Now the United States and Mongolia are also developing closer economic relations.  As we discussed in our bilateral meeting, to enhance these economic ties, we are mutually working toward a transparency agreement that would make Mongolia an even more attractive destination for America and foreign investment.  

        I would just like to flatly state the United States remains strongly committed to helping the Mongolian people build a better future.  That is why over the last 20 years USAID has provided more than $200 million in grant assistance to Mongolia, with programs that seek to bolster democracy and economic growth.  

        And as you pointed out, that's why we have committed another $285 million through the Millennium Challenge Corporation compact.  That assistance is focused on a critical set of issues including combating corruption through training programs at all levels of government, improving rule of law by developing checks and balances at all levels of government, vocational training to prepare Mongolians for better jobs and improving infrastructure to make the country’s critical north-south corridor more accessible.  

        I hope that you and the people of Mongolia will take my visit here today -— and President Obama’s meeting with your President earlier this summer -— as signs of how impressed we are by the progress you’ve already made.

        These reciprocal visits are also signs of how important this relationship is to the United States.  As I told you earlier, we are very proud to be considered a “third neighbor.” And, like any good neighbor should, we’ll continue to do our part to support Mongolia’s political and economic development.  And, Mr. Prime Minister, we look forward to even closer ties in the years to come.

        And I want to thank you again for the hospitality.

END    2:53 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 19, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao
4:26 P.M. (Local)

        PRESIDENT HU:  (As translated.)  Honorable Vice President, it is a great pleasure to meet you again in just half a year’s time.  I want to welcome you to pay this official visit to China.

        Mr. Vice President, you’re an old friend of the Chinese people.  You’ve made two previous visits to China, the first one in 1979 and then again in 2001.

        During my visit to the United States this past January, you and Secretary Clinton hosted a welcoming banquet for me, and you gave a warm and a friendly remarks at that occasion.  I wish to express my sincere appreciation for that again.

        Over the last two days, National People’s Congress Chairman Wu Bangguo, Premier Wen Jiabao and Vice President Xi Jinping have had very good meetings and talks with you.  You attended a China-U.S. Business Dialogue, and tomorrow you will be visiting Chengdu of Sichuan province.  I believe your current visit will help you have a deeper understanding of China and the Chinese people.

        This visit will also help push forward exchanges and cooperation between our two countries in various fields and make new contribution to the building of a China-U.S. cooperative partnership.

        Now, I’d like to listen to you, Mr. Vice President.

        VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, it’s an honor to be here.  I thank you for your time.  Your poor colleagues have had to be in my company and been so nice to me the last two days.  We spent hours together thus far.  Mr. Ambassador, again, thank you.

        To get straight to the point, Mr. President, President Obama asked me to come to Beijing to meet with you and others to reaffirm our absolute, total commitment to a strong and enduring positive relationship with China, and to reaffirm our commitment to stay engaged in the world in the most vigorous way possible.

        I have -- I have made two visits to China, but, Mr. President, in light of President Obama’s request, I expect, with your indulgence, I’ll make many more in the near term.  Your meeting with President Obama made a very strong, positive impression on the American people.  And my meetings here thus far have been extremely helpful to me.  I began to establish a very good relationship with Vice President Xi, and the President and I look forward to working with him, as well as hoping to continue the great legacy you’ve begun in the relationship.

        I must tell you I’m impressed by his raw command of issues, and it has been reassuring.  And, Mr. President, President Obama genuinely looks forward seeing you in Hawaii.  His favorite place in the world is Hawaii.  It’s his home state.

END 4:32 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 19, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden at a Meeting with Chinese Premier Wen
Leadership Compound
Beijing, China
3:10 P.M. (Local)
 
PREMIER WEN:  (As translated.)  It’s a great pleasure to meet you today, Mr. Vice President.  I note that we were born in the same year.  You have spent about 35 years in public service, and I’ve been working in the government compound of Beijing for more or less the same period of time.  And I know that you are a big sports fan, so am I.  (Laughter.)
 
I know that in the past weeks and months, you have put in a large amount of effort to assisting the President in securing an agreement with the Congress about raising the U.S. debt ceiling, cutting U.S. deficit and stabilizing the U.S. economy.  You have played a vital role in this process.
 
In spite of the difficulties facing the U.S. economy at present, I have full confidence that the United States will overcome these difficulties and get its economy back on the track of healthy growth.  The prosperity and stability of the United States is in the interest of the whole world.
 
In the past two to three days, you have engaged widely with the sectors in China, both public and private.  You have been sending a very strong message that is the further growth of China-U.S. ties is not only important for our two countries, but also for the whole world.
 
It’s particularly important that you sent a very clear message to the Chinese public that the United States will keep its word or -- and its obligations with regard to its government debt.  It will preserve the safety, liquidity and value of U.S. treasuries.
 
I’m sure that will give a boost to the investors’ confidence in the U.S. economy.  You have already had some meetings with other Chinese leaders.  Today, I would like to focus our discussion on economy.  Now, I would like to give the floor to you, Mr. Vice President.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Premier, thank you very much for the hospitality.  What a magnificent place.  Now I know why even though we were born in the same year, you look so much younger than I.  (Laughter.)  You worked in a much more commodious environment than I do.  (Laughter.)
 
PREMIER WEN:  (As translated.)  Well, I have -- this idea for our post-meeting schedule today, that is maybe we can take a brief walk in the surrounding areas of this whole compound.  The compound was first built back -- 500 years back, and this current structure that we are having this meeting today has about 250 years of history. 
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I would be delighted to do that if you would just write a note to President Hu of why I’d be late.  (Laughter.)  As Vice President, I’m very accustomed to accommodating Presidents.  (Laughter.)  But I would love to see your place.
 
Let me say that we have something else in common besides our birth year, and that's the -- it’s our absolute and mutual confidence in the U.S. economy.  No one has ever won betting against the U.S. economy.  And I’m anxious to talk to you about both our economies and how we can work together.  But I point out U.S. treasuries, we’re going to -- we’re going to take care of very closely not merely because China owns 8 percent of them, but because the Americans own 85 percent.
 
It is -- we appreciate and welcome your concluding that the United States is such a safe haven because we appreciate your investment in U.S. treasuries.  And very sincerely, I want to make clear that you have nothing to worry about in terms of their -- their viability. 
 
I just had the opportunity to meet with the American business community, some of the leaders here investing in China, and then we had a joint meeting with leading Chinese business enterprises along with -- along with the Vice President whom I have found to be a --
 
(Pool escorted from room before conclusion of event.)
 
END
3:17 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 19, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Chinese Vice President Xi at a U.S.-China Business Roundtable
Beijing Hotel
Beijing, China
10:42 A.M. (Local)
 
VICE PRESIDENT XI:  (As translated.)  Vice President Biden, representatives of the business communities of the two countries, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, it gives me great  pleasure today to have this operation to attend together with Mr. Vice President, an opportunity presented by your visit to China, actually -- the China-U.S. Business Dialogue.
 
I know that the representatives present are accomplished business people in your respective fields, and you have made active contribution to the business cooperation between our two countries. 
 
Let me take this opportunity to express my appreciation and pay my tribute to the efforts you have made in advancing the business cooperation between our two countries.  Enterprises are key contributors to the wealth of human society and important forces in driving world progress and development.
 
Business people of both China and the United States -- honest -- (audio difficulties) -- over the past 30 years and more since we established diplomatic relations, the business people of the two countries have worked together in a pioneering effort and returned a lot of -- (audio difficulties) -- January this year, President Hu Jintao paid a successful state visit to the United States. 
 
President Hu and President Obama jointly inaugurated a new stage in China-U.S. ties that is our joint effort to build a cooperative partnership based on mutual respect and mutual benefit. 
 
During his visit to the U.S., President Hu Jintao encouraged business people of the two countries to make the most of the opportunities presented by the deepening economic globalization, actively explore each other’s market, and promote our mutually beneficial cooperation.
 
President Obama also stressed that the cooperation between the business communities of the two countries is the most important part of U.S.-China ties.  The businesses of the two countries are the primary force of the business cooperation between us.  And it’s for you to work together in exploring and shaping the future of our cooperative partnership.
 
I believe it’s important that China-U.S. businesses should seize the opportunities and work together to pursue common development as China-U.S. relations continue to deepen and in particular in the face of a complex and severe situation of the world economy.
 
To do that I would like to make the following four points.  First, we need to reinforce confidence.  The international financial markets, drastic fluctuations and uncertainties and destabilizing factors confronting world economic recovery have intensified, posing new challenges to economic growth and the businesses of the two countries.  Under such circumstances what’s most important is to reinforce confidence as confidence is more precious than gold.
 
As far as China is concerned, we will continue to pursue a proactive fiscal policy and prudent monetary policy.  We will maintain the continuity and stability of our macro-economic policy and make it more targeted, flexible and forward-looking.  We are going to strike a proper balance between fast and steady growth, adjustment of economic structure and managing inflation expectations.  We are confident that we are able to keep steady and fast economic growth.  There will never be a so called “hard landing” for the Chinese economy.
 
Yesterday in my discussion with Vice President Biden, he briefed me about efforts of the U.S. government in spurring growth and jobs, cutting the budget deficit, properly handling the debt problem, and preserving the confidence of global investors.
 
The U.S. economy is highly resilient and has a strong capacity for self-repairment.  We believe that the U.S. economy will achieve even better development as it rises to challenges.  We hope that the business people of the two countries will reinforce confidence, work hard to turn challenges into opportunities and embrace change and innovation.
 
I hope that the business people of the two sides will make active contributions through their development to the growth of China and U.S. economies and to the strong, sustainable and balanced development of the global economy.
 
Second, we need to take a long-term perspective.  If one is to have a full view of the scenery, one needs to cast his eyes to the far horizon.  Over 30 years ago, when China just launched a firm and prudent exploration of reform and opening up, crossing the river by testing out the stones, the business people of the United States already showed extraordinary vision and courage and came to China for investment and business establishment.
 
Over the past 30 years and more, they have witnessed China’s fast development and shared the opportunities of China, their investment has produced bountiful results.  Today’s China has a more enabling policy environment, improved infrastructural facilities, better services and a larger pool of human resources.  There is even broader space in the Chinese market.
 
It has been clearly stipulated in China’s 12th five-year plan that we will accelerate a shift of growth model and stimulate greater domestic demand.  In the next five years, China is expected to import over $8 trillion of commodities, and by 2015, the total retail sales of China are expected to reach 31 trillion RMB-yuan, and that will create greater business opportunities for American businesses and businesses of other countries.
 
At the same time, an increasing number of competitive and far-sighted Chinese businesses are actively exploring the American market.  We hope that the business people of the two sides will take full advantage of the enormous opportunities for cooperation in energy, environment, infrastructure, biomedicine, financial services and between small- and medium-sized enterprises.
 
We hope that they will work closely with each other, make the most of the current favorable conditions and invest in the future, writing together new chapters in our business cooperation.
 
Third, we need to deepen cooperation as China’s reform, opening up and modernization drive gather momentum.  There has been a fundamental change in our conventional model of cooperation where the United States provides capital and technologies; and China labor, resources and the market.  Today an increasing number of U.S. businesses -- is providing quality services and products to Chinese consumers.  And more and more Chinese businesses are going to the United States to make investment and start businesses, contributing their part to the growth of the U.S. economy and the creation of jobs in the U.S.
 
For example, the North America route opened by COSCO has contributed to the prosperity of American ports and more jobs there.  The Novel and Haier Group have opened factories and R&D centers in the U.S., and their products are wildly popular with American consumers.  The Xiangtan Electric Manufacturing Corporation of Hunan province will also soon establish a branch in Delaware.  Mr. Lu Quanqiu from Wan Xiang Group has employed over 600 local people in his company’s branch in the United States.
 
These are the vivid examples of the growth of our business cooperation, and it shows that our cooperation is expanding and moving to a higher level.
 
There is competition in our cooperation.  Yet such competition is healthy based on mutual learning and mutual reinforcement.  In a fundamental sense it is conducive to our common development.
 
Fourth, we need to be mutually inclusive.  A Chinese proverb reads, as an ocean admits all rivers, one is to be inclusive to all things.
 
Given the big size and rapid expansion of our business cooperation, it’s only natural that we have some differences and frictions in our cooperation.  But we need to approach them with an inclusive mind, and we need to properly handle these differences through equal consultations in compliance with the law of the market and WTO rules.  We should not politicize or sensationalize the trade issues.
 
Here I want to emphasize that China will continue to free its mind and stay committed to reform and opening up.  We will -- running the country according to the law, and make continual improvements to our laws and regulations related to foreign business cooperation.  We will intensify IPR protection and treat all businesses as equals in terms of the accreditation of indigenous innovation products and government procurement.
 
At the same time, we hope the United States will eliminate the interferences of trade and investment protectionism.  We hope that there will be early and concrete actions on the part of the United States on issues which are of high concern to the Chinese side, including easing the export restrictions of high-tech products to China and providing a fair environment for Chinese businesses to make investment in the United States.
 
I believe as long as we treat each other as equals and embrace mutual understanding and mutual accommodation, we will have even better growth in our business cooperation. 
 
In conclusion, I wish even greater accomplishments for the business people of the two countries.  And together we can write more success stories in our practical cooperation.
 
Thank you.  (Applause.)
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.  I will be brief.  There’s much to talk about.  The Vice President and I -- and I want to thank him for his hospitality and look forward to his reciprocal visit to the United States.  I -- we’ve had an opportunity to talk at some length, and we’ll have further opportunities, so I will be brief because I’m mainly here to listen.
 
Much has changed since my first visit here, actually to this hotel over 30 years ago with a group of -- I was then a very junior United States senator, and we were the first delegation to meet with Deng Xiaoping.  And I brought with me the heads of -- we brought with us, the senators, the heads of certain American companies, two of whom are here today and -- although they weren’t here 30 years ago -- both Caterpillar and DuPont.  And there was open discussion about the possibility of American business doing business in China, which was unheard of up to that point, and the reverse, as well.
 
And I’m pleased to say over 30 years later, I look around this table at such a group of successful and powerful business leaders, both in China and America, and it gives me reason to have great optimism about the next 30 years.
 
I agree with what the Vice President said, and he listed the four areas that I will not go into detail, the four points that he wanted to make.  But with regard to the point about confidence, I want you to know that I have absolute, unequivocal confidence in the strength and the vitality and the growth of  the American economy.  No one has ever made money betting against America.  And I am absolutely confident, as well, that the two largest economies in the world are the road to world recovery.  And we’ve had many discussions so far, many hours of discussions.
 
I also agree with the Vice President that competition is healthy.  It is good.  It has awakened us.  It has regenerated us.  It has -- it is nothing but welcome on the part of the United States.  And one other point we’ll get to discuss today, I hope you will discuss, is that we welcome -- President Obama and I, we welcome, encourage and see nothing but positive benefits flowing from direct investment in the United States from Chinese businesses and Chinese entities.  It means jobs.  It means American jobs.
 
We also welcome and are really encouraged by the 12th five-year plan and the reordering of the economy toward a more consumer-based economy.  That is also -- I never tell another man or another country what’s in their interest, but it seems to me it’s very much in the interest of the Chinese and the Chinese people, but it’s also in the interest of the United States. 
 
So I would also like to point out that we’ve made much progress, but there are some real and perceived barriers that exist in both countries that have to be dealt with.  I think it’s legitimate for Chinese business persons and government officials to point to the dilemma with the American visa process, which I very much want to work on with the Vice President.  I think there’s other things.
 
But I also think you are aware that we think market access is -- changes have to take place here in China, as well.  And so the Vice President and I have had all of our discussions, going back to our first meeting in Rome, based on mutual respect.  And one of the things that I have a bad reputation for is being straightforward, and I’m really pleased that the Vice President has been straightforward, as well.
 
And so only friends and equals can serve each other by being straightforward and honest with them about the perceived injustices or the perceived tilting of a playing field; and you have legitimate concerns about access to America.  And I would argue we have legitimate concerns in reverse.  But the trajectory -- the trajectory of the relationship is nothing but positive, and it’s overwhelmingly in the mutual interest of both our countries.  And it’s presumptuous to say this, but I think it’s in the interest of the world.  It’s in the interest of the world that we increase -- increase -- the interaction between not only our business community, but our economies writ large.
 
Obviously, economic issues have been a particular focus of the growing cooperation between the United States and China.  Our governments are committed to and working hard to promote economic growth.  It’s strong.  It’s sustainable, and it is balanced, fair and open.  Bilateral trade and investment between the United States and China, as is pointed out, is growing rapidly in both directions.  We’d like it to go even more rapidly in terms of investment in the United States because it creates jobs and it creates economic opportunities in both countries.  And we will have more good news later today about greater access and also continued development and investment both ways.
 
Our enhanced cooperation to put it bluntly and succinctly is extremely good for the United States.  I would suggest, although you would make -- be your own judge, I think it’s good for China, as well.  And I think it’s good for the wider world.
 
And so in the spirit of trying to figure out how to resolve both perceived and real barriers that exist on both sides of the Pacific, I’m anxious to listen and be educated. 
 
So, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you, Mr. Vice President.  I’m anxious to hear what people have to say.
 
END
11:03 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 18, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Meeting with Chairman Wu
The Great Hall of the  Beijing, China
3:34 P.M. (Local)
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  Mr. Vice President, on behalf of the National People’s Congress of China, a very warm welcome.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  It’s a delight to be here.
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  And what a delightful thing to see you again in Beijing.  We had a very good conversation back in September 2009 when I visited the United States, and you were very kind to show me your office.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Chairman, this is much nicer than my office.  (Laughter.)  
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  Well, I remember I said to you back then that your office was exquisite but not very big. 
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  That's right.  You said that very diplomatically.  (Laughter.)
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  But you said with a great sense of humor that this office is the closest to the President’s office.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  That's right.
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  And that shows its importance.  And your visit is a very important one.  Foreign Minister Yang just told me that you had very good discussions with Vice President Xi.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Yes.
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  You had a deep discussion about issues of mutual interest, and tomorrow you will have meetings with the President and the Premier.  I’m sure that your visit will give new impetus to our bilateral relationship.  We will further promote the steady and sustainable growth of China-U.S. ties.
 
Now, it’s been 10 years since your last visit to China.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Too long.
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  Well, many changes have taken place here.  I’m happy to learn that besides Beijing, you’re also going to Chengdu.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Yes.
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  And you will have more opportunities to engage with the young people, and also opportunities to see the post-earthquake reconstruction there.
 
While the city of Dujiangyan has a culture and civilization of over 2,000 years, I’m sure that trip will help you gain a deeper understanding about China.  I sincerely wish you a very happy stay in China.  And you will leave this country with a very fond memory.  Once again, very warm welcome.
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, it’s a delight to be here, Mr. Chairman.  As I told you when you were in my office, when I was a chairman, I had a much bigger office.  (Laughter.)  I used to have an important job when I was chairman of the Foreign  Relations Committee.  I had a big office, and a large staff, and then I became Vice President.  (Laughter.)
 
There’s an old joke told by a former Vice President.  He said, I once had two brothers, one went to sea and the other became Vice President.  I never heard from either again. 
 
But unfortunately, your colleagues are hearing from me again and again and again and again.  I beg their indulgence.  We sat together all morning.  The Ambassador has been very gracious, as has the Minister, so I hope they don't mind listening again.
 
As we discussed in my office, Mr. Chairman, you know I now and have since my first visit in 1979 with Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping, I’m of the view that this is a central, critical relationship -- China and the United States.  I hope this doesn’t sound chauvinistic to other countries, but our mutual success will benefit the whole world.  As the two largest economies in the world, at the moment when the world economic circumstance is uneasy, I think we hold the key together to not only our own prosperity, but to generating growth and jobs worldwide.  And that's the overwhelming reason I’ve come, to talk about jobs and growth; and the -- as was phrased this morning, the reordering of our economies -- yours and ours.
 
So I’m anxious to talk to you, and I appreciate your hospitality. 
 
CHAIRMAN WU:  Well, thank you for your warm remarks.
 
END
3:41 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 18, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Meeting with Chinese Vice President XI
The Great Hall of the  Beijing, China
10:40 A.M. (Local)
 
VICE PRESIDENT XI: Honorable, Mr. Vice President, Joseph Biden, the ancient Chinese philosopher Confucious said, isn’t it delightful to welcome friends coming from afar?  I would like to, again, extend a warm welcome to you.
 
Your visit this time is a major event in this year’s China-U.S. relationship, and it’s very important for further implementing the outcomes of President Hu Jintao’s visit to the United States, and to pushing forward the building of the China-U.S. cooperative partnership.
 
Mr. Vice President, you’ve been in China twice.  You’ve long cared about and been committed to promoting the China-U.S. relationship.  Your belief that a successful, stable and prosperous China is good for the United States and, of course, for China and good for the whole world.  I appreciate that statement.
 
I, too, believe that under the new situation China and the United States have evermore extensive common interests, and we shoulder evermore important common responsibilities.  It is the joint desire of the people of China and the United States and elsewhere in the world to see a close cooperation between China and the United States.  We would like to work with your country to promote the development of relations between our two great nations.
 
Our talks this morning is an important component of your engagements and activities here.  I would like to have an in-depth exchange of views with you on our bilateral relationship and international and regional issues of mutual interest.  
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Vice President, and, delegations, it’s a genuine honor to be here.  It’s an honor to be back in China.  As you know, as you mentioned, Mr. Vice President, this is -- it’s been 10 years since I’ve been here last.  And my first visit was in 1979 when I had the honor of being with Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping at the time.
 
I’ve always been an admirer of the Chinese people and the great sweep of history and the contributions that your country has made for centuries.  When I arrived in 1979, I got the first opportunity I ever had to see some of the great wonders of this country, including as all visitors mention, I’m sure, the Great Wall.  But I would presume to suggest that in the great sweep of your history, there has been more progress made between 1979 and 2011 than maybe any time in your history. It’s amazing.  You personally and all your colleagues should be complimented.
 
I come from the United States, Mr. Vice President, at the invitation of your President and you with hope and expectation and looking forward to your reciprocal visit to Washington.
 
I also come with a strong message that the United States of America is -- plans on looking -- will continue to be engaged totally in the world and events of the world; and maybe even a stronger message that our commitment to establish a close and serious relationship with the people of China is of the utmost importance to my country and -- presumptuous of me to say -- I think maybe your country, as well.
 
Fifty years from now, 100 years from now, historians and scholars will judge us based upon whether or not we’re able to establish a strong, permanent and friendly working relationship.
 
For I would suggest that there’s no more important relationship that we need to establish on the part of the United States than a close relationship with China.
 
As we say in the chamber where I worked for 36 years, the United States Senate, if you permit me a point of personal privilege:  I came away from our visit in Rome greatly impressed -- impressed with your sweep and knowledge of history, impressed with your openness and candor and impressed with the notion that you, as I -- and I know your ambassador believes -- that foreign policy is more than just formal visits; it’s establishing personal relationships and trust.  And it is my fond hope that our personal relationship will continue to grow, as well.
 
Let me conclude by saying to you and your colleagues, Mr. Vice President, that I’m absolutely confident that the economic stability of the world rests in no small part on the cooperation between -- between the United States and China.  It affects every country from your neighbor to the north, to Argentina in the southern tip of South America.  It is the key, in my view, to global economic stability.
 
(End of recording.)
 
END
10:51 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  August 15, 2011
Conference Call With Reporters To Discuss Vice President Biden Trip to China, Mongolia, and Japan
11:03 A.M. EDT

        MS. DUDLEY:  Thank you very much.  And thank you, everyone, for joining the call today.  Our hope is to provide you all with a more detailed sense of the Vice President’s schedule and goals during his trip to China, Mongolia, and Japan.  

        With us today, we have National Security Advisor to the Vice President Tony Blinken, Senior Director for Asian Affairs on the national security staff Danny Russel, and Undersecretary for International Affairs at the Department of Treasury Lael Brainard.  This call will be on the record, and our speakers are happy to take questions after they give some brief opening statements at the top.

        We’d like to keep this call as focused on the Vice President’s trip as much as possible.  So with that, I’m just going to go ahead and turn it over to Tony Blinken and let him kick it off.

        MR. BLINKEN:  Amy, thanks very much and thanks to everyone for joining the call today.  Let me run you through the big picture of the Vice President’s trip with some highlights from the schedule and then turn it over to Danny, and then to Lael, to go into more detail on some of the policy questions we’re looking at.

        This is the Vice President’s first trip to East Asia as Vice President.  But, I think as many of you probably know, he traveled to Asia many times as a senator, including back in 1979 as part of the first Senate delegation to China after we normalized relations.

        This trip that starts tomorrow is part of the administration’s dedicated effort over the last two-and-a-half years to renew and intensify the U.S. role in Asia.  We’ve pursued a consistent strategy set out by President Obama to expand our presence and our influence in the region.  The Vice President’s trip is a reflection of our belief that the United States is a pacific power whose interests are inextricably linked with Asia’s economic security and political order.  

        The trip begins with four days in China, Beijing, and the southwestern city of Chengdu.  We then travel to Mongolia for a day, and finally to our close ally Japan for two days.  The dates specifically are China, August 17 through 22; Mongolia, August 22nd; and Japan, August 22nd to the 24th.  

        So let me just give you a quick preview of each part before I turn it over to Danny and to Lael.  Let me start with China.  This trip to China originated in President Hu Jintao’s state visit in January, when President Hu Jintao formally invited the Vice President to China and we in turn invited Vice President Xi to the United States.  These reciprocal visits are mentioned in the January 2011 U.S.-China joint statement.  

        One of the primary purposes of the trip is to get to know China’s future leadership, to build a relationship with Vice President Xi, and to discuss with him and other Chinese leaders the full breadth of issues in the U.S.-China relationship.  Simply put, we’re investing in the future of the U.S.-China relationship.

        The schedule, very broadly -- there is obviously a lot more detail that will come out in the days ahead.  But let me just give you the headlines from our three days in Beijing and one day in Chengdu.  Day one in Beijing, we’ll have a welcoming ceremony.  There will be two meetings with Vice President Xi and a meeting with the head of China’s National People’s Congress Wen Jiabao, and finally a formal banquet hosted by Vice President Xi in the evening.

        The second day, also in Beijing, will begin with a roundtable discussion with U.S. and Chinese business leaders.  And we’ll be talking about the business communities’ experiences operating in each other’s countries -- the opportunities, the obstacles -- the role that governments can play to enhance cooperation and address some of the challenges that our business communities face.  And then, in the afternoon, the Vice President meets with Premier Wen and with President Hu.  

        Day three is both Beijing and Chengdu.  The Vice President will spend some time with the embassy staff.  And, of course, we have a new ambassador in China, Gary Locke.  So he’ll be meeting with them.  And we’ll be spending some time traveling to Chengdu in the afternoon.  

        And then, day four in Chengdu, a quick word about that.  Given the growth and urbanization of China’s western provinces and also U.S. investment there and the fact that no U.S. leader has visited there, we decided to travel to Chengdu in Sichuan Province.  In Chengdu, the Vice President will give a speech on U.S.-China relations at Sichuan University.  He’ll meet with senior provincial officials from Sichuan.

        He then travels to Dujiangyan City, jointly with Vice President Xi.  They’ll visit a high school that was rebuilt following the 2008 earthquake.  And then, in the evening, we expect the Vice President and Vice President Xi to have an informal dinner at a local restaurant in Chengdu.  

        That then brings us to Mongolia, something we are very excited about.  This is, on one level, a truly historic visit.  I’m sure many of you will recall the last visit of a Vice President to Mongolia.  That was in 1944, when FDR’s Vice President Henry Wallace toured Asia and included a stop in Mongolia.  

        Mongolia offers an important example of a successful transition to a strong democracy and a partner with whom we’re expanding cooperation in a broad variety of diplomatic, economic, and defense areas.  Like China, this visit to Mongolia is a reflection of our broader effort to engage emerging powers as a way to build a secure, prosperous, and democratic Asia.  

        I think many of you know the Mongolian President Elbegdorj was here not too long ago.  He met with President Obama in the Oval Office in June.  And this trip builds on that important visit.

        So we arrive in Ulaanbaatar on the morning of August 22nd.  The Vice President meets with the Prime Minister and then with the President.  And the Mongolians are going to host a cultural display of traditional Mongolian sports for us.  I’m told that may include archery, wrestling, and horse racing.  And we’re looking forward to that.

        And, finally, Japan.  The Vice President will be in Japan for two days.  He is visiting Japan to underscore that the U.S.-Japan alliance is strong.  And, of course, Japan is an ally, but also a friend.  And the U.S. stands with and supports Japan and the Japanese people as they recover from the March earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear emergency.

        So while he is in Japan, the Vice President will meet with Prime Minister Kan.  He is going to visit the northeastern city of Sendai, where American forces took the lead in reopening the airport after the earthquake.  And it also -- he is going to have an opportunity to thank American military and civilian personnel for the remarkable support and assistance they provided during Japan’s so-called “triple disaster” earlier this year.  

        So that’s a broad overview of the trip and stops.  Let me turn it over to Danny Russel to go into more detail on the policy, and then to Lael Brainard.  

        Danny.

        MR. RUSSEL:  Okay, thanks Tony.  And let me pick up on some of the points that you made, hopefully without being duplicative.  Namely that the visit by the Vice President to these three important Asian countries is of course timely, but it really also needs to be seen in context in the continuum of our policy approach to Asia.

        You’ll see that the schedule and the substantive agenda for the meetings exemplifies that approach that’s been taken by the Obama administration since day one, since we’ve been investing heavily in the Asia-Pacific region.  And our policy approach has been built on strengthening U.S. alliances and expanding our cooperation with emerging powers, and also working together in the effort to help to develop regional institutions in the Asia-Pacific region.

        I also want to mention that the Vice President’s trip beginning tomorrow kicks off a very busy diplomatic calendar for our Asia policy that extends through the fall, when President Obama will host APEC in Honolulu in November and then will also attend the East Asia Summit in Bali, Indonesia.  So planning for the upcoming meetings will I’m sure be very much on the Vice President’s mind when he is in Beijing and in Tokyo.

        On China, I guess I would start by reminding everyone that President Obama has met with President Hu Jintao already nine times and with Premier Wen Jiabao three times since 2009.  It seems likely that our two presidents will have meetings at some of the upcoming major multilateral events this fall.  

        And, as Tony mentioned, the Vice President’s trip and Vice President’s Xi Jinping’s reciprocal visit to follow are part of the continuum of interactions between the leaders of our two countries.  I think what’s particularly important is that this will be the first time that a very senior U.S. official has spent a substantial amount of time with Vice President Xi Jinping.

        They have met and begun developing a relationship.  But I think this visit provides an opportunity for the Vice President to talk extensively with Vice President Xi about the breadth of issues in our bilateral relationship and in the region.  

        And, as Tony said, it’s an example of our investing in the future of the U.S.-China relationship.  The context, as I’ve said, for this meeting between the two vice presidents is that we make a point of sustaining regular and high-level contacts with Chinese leaders as a way to ensure that we’re able to speak directly and speak authoritatively about the entire spectrum of issues that we are working together on.

        And what makes the visit timely is that both of our countries are trying to tackle a range of security and economic issues -- North Korea and Iran’s nuclear weapons programs of course; bilateral and global economic issues, which Lael will speak to; the security architecture in East Asia; stability and security in South Asia and Afghanistan and Pakistan.  These are the sorts of issues that we should expect the Vice President to discuss with Vice President Xi, as well as other members of China’s senior leadership during the trip.

        Naturally, there are issues that the Chinese themselves typically raise like Taiwan and Tibet.  And there are issues that every senior official who meets with Chinese leaders is going to raise, like human rights.

        I think the key point with regard to the Vice President’s meetings is that they are part of the continuum, and they continue and expand the ongoing and the constructive dialogue that President Obama has been conducting since he and Vice President Biden came into office.

        Now, to Mongolia -- Mongolia is taking over this year the chairmanship of the Community of Democracies.  And one of the points that the President made when he hosted President Elbegdorj in the Oval Office in June is that Mongolia has an activist approach to strengthening democratic principles throughout the world.  And it’s particularly credible and influential, given the tremendous strides that Mongolia itself has made since the end of the Cold War.

        So the Vice President’s trip to Mongolia is clearly a strong expression of support for Mongolia’s growing democracy.  And the trip reflects also the tremendous strides that we’ve made together in diplomatic and security cooperation.  

        On the diplomatic side, Mongolia has been working with us on a raft of important issues -- non-proliferation, peacekeeping, on human rights.  On the defense and security side, Mongolia is making substantial contributions of troops to the operations both in Iraq and Afghanistan.  So there is a lot of good work and a lot to talk about.

        The third stop, Japan, is significant I think in two respects.  One is as pertains to Japan’s recovery and reconstruction after the March triple disaster.  And I think the other significant element in the Vice President’s visit to Tokyo and Sendai is underscoring the tremendous strength and great importance of the U.S.-Japan alliance.

        The President and the Vice President recognize that the U.S. economy and the global economy has a big stake in Japan’s full and fast recovery.  So this trip I think offers the Vice President the opportunity to see for himself the great strides that the Japanese are making, and in many areas with the help of U.S. companies and certainly with the full support of the U.S. government.

        I know the President and the Vice President are confident Japan will emerge stronger than before, and the sooner that happens, obviously the better, given Japan’s role in regional security and global trade and finance and so on.  

        There’s a lot going on at this particular time, so in addition to economic issues, certainly the Vice President will be discussing security issues in Northeast Asia, particularly regarding North Korea and issues such as stability in Afghanistan where Japan is making an immense contribution.  Of course, there are alliance coordination issues and there are bilateral issues to touch on.

        But I think fundamentally, given the strength of the U.S.-Japan relationship, the Vice President’s visit serves to demonstrate how much we care about our friends.  

        So why don’t I stop there and turn it over to Secretary Brainard.

        MS. BRAINARD:  The economic side of the trip obviously is very important.  The trip provides an opportunity for Vice President Biden to advance American economic interests in the dynamic region in Asia broadly.  Of course, our trade and investment ties with China in particular are growing rapidly in both directions and we expect this to continue to be a vitally important trade investment relationship in terms of our broader jobs and exports agenda.

        If you look over the past year, U.S. exports to China have grown faster than to the rest of the world and have now topped $100 billion over the last year.  And, of course, those experts are supporting hundreds of thousands of American jobs in a whole variety of sectors ranging from high-tech to soy beans, from aircraft to autos.

        We’ve also seen a very rapid expansion of Chinese foreign direct investment into the U.S. market.  It more than doubled over the last year to $6 billion, which is also part of the President and the Vice President’s national jobs and exports strategy.

        The Vice President will be carrying the message that we need to continue to work to level the playing field for American workers and American businesses.  We’ve made quite a bit of progress over the last year, but we’re going to need to continue working on that front.  If you look at the exchange rate, we’ve seen appreciation since China moved to allow its exchange rates to resume flexibility in June of 2010.  

        We’ve seen nearly 7 percent bilateral appreciation against the dollar in nominal terms.  Of course, that is even greater if you adjust for the faster rate of inflation in China relative to the United States.  We’re going to keep pushing on that front.  The exchange rate remains substantially undervalued, but we have seen some important progress there to date.

        Through the President’s visit with President Hu in January through the JCCT, through the Strategic and Economic Dialogue we’ve also made some progress.  China has removed discriminatory procurement policies and it has agreed to strengthen enforcement of intellectual property rights in a number of very important ways.  But, of course, those agendas are a work in progress.  We’re going to continue pushing on that.

        Both China and the United States have tremendous mutual interest in seeing a stronger global economic recovery.  And China has a very important role to play in that process.  China needs to reorient its economic strategy away from a traditional reliance on net export-led growth to a domestic demand-led growth strategy.  And that’s something that we’ve been working together I think very effectively in the G20 and in the Strategic and Economic Dialogue and in the President’s and Vice President’s dealings with Chinese senior leadership.

        And so, the Vice President is going to continue pushing on that front.  And he will also have an opportunity to discuss some of the vital trade issues with the business community.  Those are very important commitments made in the JCCT and the S&ED and in the President’s visit to continue to improve the protection of intellectual property and to continue to open their markets to U.S. exports.  

        I think it’s important to stress that we each have challenges.  China has the challenges of moving from an export-led to a domestic demand-led economy.  They have challenges associated with an aging workforce.  They have challenges of moving from technology adopters to technology originators.  And, as you know, we are also taking on our fiscal and growth challenges with that very important deal that the Vice President was so critical in securing two weeks ago.

        And so, we’re both working very hard to address our respective challenges in a way that I think will be good for our citizens and good mutually for growth in each other’s economies and good for the world economy.  

        So with that, let me turn it back over to Tony.

        MR. BLINKEN:  Great.  Amy, I think we’re ready to take any questions.

        MS. DUDLEY:  Yes, I think we’re ready for questions.

        Q    Yes, thanks for doing this call.  I want to ask you a little bit -- you mentioned that human rights would be something that would be discussed.  Vice President Xi, just a month ago, was in Tibet and was talking a little bit about how -- worried about the separatism, as he puts it, from the Dalai Lama’s group.  What’s your message going to be on human rights and specifically on Tibet considering -- particularly if it involves Vice President Xi in Tibet?

        MR. RUSSEL:  Hi, Danny here.  Let me take that.  As you know, the President just met with the Dalai Lama at the White House last month.  And so our position on Tibet is consistent and clear.  And as we always do, I think the Vice President can be expected to reinforce the message to the Chinese that there is great value in their renewing their dialogue with the representatives of the Dalai Lama, with the goal of peacefully resolving differences.  

        More broadly, the protection of human rights globally is a central part of President Obama’s foreign policy in China as it is elsewhere.  And, as we do consistently, we will raise our concerns about the human rights situation throughout China.  We do this directly and privately with Chinese leaders and policy makers.  And, as the Vice President did during the S&ED -- the Security and Economic Dialogue in Washington in May -- we’ll also make our views known publicly as well.

        Q    Hi, thanks for doing the call.  Obviously, the trip is coming after the prolonged debt debate here.  And we saw some of China’s warnings since then about getting our fiscal house in order.  How much -- I guess, can you go into a little bit of what we might expect to hear from the Vice President in terms of his message to the Chinese about our fiscal situation?

        MR. BLINKEN:  Lael, do you want to start?

        MS. BRAINARD:  Yes, thanks.  I think the -- obviously, the Vice President will be in a good position to talk about the very strong deficit reduction package that we concluded here recently.  Obviously, the United States has the capacity, the will, and the commitment to tackle our major fiscal and economic challenges.

        The agreement that was reached, the Budget Control Act that was signed on August 2nd, is a major step in this direction both enacting $900 billion in deficit reduction right up front through discretionary spending caps, followed by a process for cutting an additional $1.5 trillion through the bipartisan committee whose members have now been named.

        But as you’ve seen in the last week, there continues to be extremely strong investor demand for U.S. Treasury securities, recognizing that this market continues to be the deepest, most liquid in the world and I think recognition widely in China and around the world that the U.S. economy remains the most flexible, the most innovative.  And, again, as China moves forward to address its challenges, as we move forward to address our challenges, we have very strong mutual interests.  And I expect that those are the issues that the Vice President is going to want to raise with the Chinese just as they want to move forward in creating a more hospitable environment.

        To become a more innovative economy, they’re going to need to start addressing some of the fundamental problems that our companies have been encountering in their market for some time -- protection of intellectual property, trying to dismantle a set of financial controls that tend to channel cheaper credit to state-owned enterprises and starve both their more innovative firms’ capital and also create an un-level playing field for our firms.

        So I think as we move forward on addressing our fiscal challenges, Chinese policy makers know that they can no longer count on the U.S. consumer to provide that demand to the global economy.  They’ve got tremendous capacity to help bolster global growth by switching to a domestic demand-led growth strategy.  And there’s tremendous opportunity for U.S. companies to assist them in doing that and to help create jobs here at home.  

        Q    Thank you very much.  Secretary Clinton has promised Senator Cornyn that the decision on F-16 sales would be made by October 1st.  Are you concerned at all that any F-16 sales announcement might have an impact on Vice President Xi Jinping’s reciprocal visit to the United States or even President Hu’s trip to Hawaii for the APEC summit, so much so that Vice President Biden will try to explain to the Chinese why the U.S. has to do what is required by law to do?  Thank you.

        MR. RUSSEL:  Hi, Danny here.  I'll take that.  Well, I think it’s important to make clear that on the issue of Taiwan that the Vice President has no plans to raise the Taiwan issue, certainly not arms sales during his trip.  He is not going to China to address that issue.  He is going, as we described, to address the broad spectrum of security, economic, political issues that we and China have to work together on.

        Now, it would not be surprising at all for the Chinese interlocutors to raise Taiwan, as they typically do, and convey their views and their concerns.  Our China policy is unchanged.  It’s based on the three U.S.-China communiqués.  And our policy towards Taiwan is based on the Taiwan Relations Act, and there is no change in that.  We take our obligations under the Taiwan Relations Act very seriously and we don’t negotiate these issues with China.

        I think that the fact of the matter is that there has been considerable progress in cross-Strait dialogue to reduce tensions.  And this is something that’s in everyone’s interest and something that we hope will continue.  We think that our policy and the Taiwan Relations Act supports an environment that is conducive to the improved relations across the Taiwan Strait and that at the same time U.S.-China relations will continue to flourish.

        Q    Hi.  Thanks for doing the call.  Which U.S. and Chinese business leaders will be at the meeting with the Vice President in Beijing on the second day of the trip?  And then, also will the issue of cyber theft and phone hacking come up in the wake of the McAfee study last week?

        MR. BLINKEN:  In terms of the business leaders and representatives, we’ll get you a list.  I don’t have that at hand, but we’ll get you a list and put that out in the next day or so.

        MR. RUSSEL:  Tony, just on the second part of the question, I won’t comment on a specific report, but I will say that cyberspace is global and both the U.S. and China are major users of cyberspace, and we therefore both have real vulnerabilities.  And, as a result, we began under the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, conversations with the Chinese, which we can discuss cyber security issues and enhance our understanding of our respective systems in order to promote cooperation in addressing both incidents and in system protections.

        Q    Hi, thanks very much.  Just a quick follow up question first for Danny.  Can you comment on the report regarding Taiwan today that the United States refused its request for 66 new Lockheed Martin F-16s?  And then, a follow up for Ms. Brainard as well, do you feel as though the Vice President will have to defend the U.S. and its position on debt and deficit?  I know you mentioned the recent deal, but does this feel in that sense that the Vice President will have to really do a sales pitch while he is there?  Thank you.

        MR. RUSSEL:  Right.  No, I won’t comment specifically on a particular story other than to say, as I did, that we take our obligations under the Taiwan Relations Act very seriously.  That’s manifest in the Obama administration’s decision to conclude an arms sale to Taiwan last year.  

        And this really isn’t what the Vice President’s trip is about.  The Vice President’s trip is about deepening our relationships and our cooperative efforts in Asia.

        MS. BRAINARD:  Yes, I think on the economic front I think the Vice President, of course, is going to want to share with foreign leaders in all three countries the plan that President Obama, Vice President Biden have worked on both to address the deficit, the long-run deficit in the Budget Control Act, but also to help support U.S. recovery, which is very important around the world.

        China has a huge interest in strong growth in the United States.  And, again, there are a lot of strengths of the U.S. economy that I think China is quite interested in helping to learn about.  And just if you look at the very strong rate of foreign direct investment into the U.S. economy over the last year, you’ll see tremendous Chinese interest in the many strengths across a whole variety of sectors that the U.S. has.  

        So, again, Chinese leaders are confronting a set of challenges there having to do with demographics, having to do with a need to move from various labor-intensive, very capital-intensive, export-oriented growth to growth that is supported by domestic consumption; to growth that is much more innovation, intensive; and growth that requires the much more sophisticated financial markets.  And so, there’s a lot of strengths that U.S. companies, the U.S. economic model, can now bring to bear as Chinese leaders think about their own domestic growth challenges.

        MR. BLINKEN:  Let me just add a quick footnote to that.  This is Tony.  I think you’ve got to also put this in a broader context, and I know the Vice President will want to do that as well.  As President Obama recently reminded the American people, and I’m sure the Vice President will have an opportunity to do that on his trip, and I quote -- this is from something the President said last week -- “For all the challenges we face, we continue to have the best universities, some of the most productive workers, the most innovative companies, the most adventurous entrepreneurs on earth.”      

        And, as Lael suggested, it’s the many strengths of our economy that have helped our country withstand economic and financial challenges over the years; strengthen the economy’s institutions, flexibility, the ability to innovate, the ability to give Americans, as well as those who come to the United States, an opportunity to pursue a prosperous future.  So that broader context will certainly be part of the Vice President’s trip.

        Q    Hi.  Yes, I was just curious about more specifics on the Vice President’s Japan portion of the trip, especially the particular date that he will be visiting Sendai.

        MR. BLINKEN:  So for the Japan piece, he will be in Japan for two days.  And he’ll be there -- arriving on the 22nd, and he will be in Sendai on the 23rd.

        Q    Thank you.  Could you elaborate a little bit on the currency issue, such as the Vice President is going to talk to China on the value of the dollar and also the appreciation of the RMB?  And also, one question for Mr. Blinken -- to this speech that the Vice President is going to give in Chengdu, what are some of the key issues that he is going to discuss relative to the U.S. and China relations?  Thank you.

        MS. DUDLEY:  I think this is going to be our last question.  

        MS. BRAINARD:  If you reflect on how the world is growing right now, obviously it is critically important for the continued sustainability and greater balance in global growth for the emerging markets that have capacity, that have untapped domestic demand to be able to play a greater role as consumers in some of the advanced economies including the U.S. build back their balanced sheets.  And that is a widely acknowledged shared challenge that if we do it successfully, it would be good for all of us.

        In China, in the 12th Five Year Plan, Chinese leaders have obviously agreed with the need for China to chart a economic course that is much more domestic demand-led.  A critical part of the adjustment mechanism in the global economy is for China to allow its exchange rate to move more quickly.  And I think Chinese leaders have acknowledged that.  They recognized that this is important in China that the -- the exchange rate to absorb more of the adjustment.  It really takes the pressure off of inflation, and so you would see less inflationary pressures as well.

        So it’s something that we think is very important for global growth.  It’s of course critically important for U.S. exports and jobs.  But we think it’s also directly in the interests of Chinese goals to lessen inflationary pressures.  

        We’ve seen some appreciation of the exchange rate.  As I’ve said, we’ve seen the exchange rate appreciating on a bilateral basis, nearly 7 percent now.  And if you take into account inflation, it’s been somewhat faster.  But we’re not satisfied with that rate of appreciation.  We know that it remains substantially undervalued.  And the Vice President will want to put special emphasis on that, because it’s important for China, it’s important for other emerging markets, and it’s important for U.S. jobs and exports.  

        MR. BLINKEN:  And on the speech, I’m going to let the speech mostly speak for itself in a few days time.  But just very broadly, as I mentioned at the top, the Vice President has been engaged with China for more than 30 years.  And he was in China in 1979, as part of the first delegation of U.S. senators after relations were normalized.  He met with then Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping.  And he of course has been back since and has been very engaged.

        So he has a vantage point to really speak about the broad sweep of the relationship over the past few decades.  How China has evolved, how the relationship has evolved, the work that we’re doing together cooperatively across an incredibly broad range of issues -- security, economic, and others -- and also some aspects of our competition, because we also have a competitive relationship, but one that need not be zero sum, where one side’s gain is the other’s loss.

        And I think one aspect of the speech that -- one issue that he is likely to emphasize in the speech as well are some of the challenges of building an innovation economy in the 21st century.  But the bottom line on the speech and indeed on the trip I think -- and this will be reflected in what the Vice President says -- is that for President Obama, for the Vice President, the bottom line is that it’s two great powers and global actors in this century.  China and the United States face many similar challenges and share many common responsibilities.  

        And the Vice President and President have the conviction that the more we can act on those challenges and on those responsibilities together, the more our people and the world will benefit.  And that’s the larger message of the speech in Chengdu.  Thanks very much.

        MS. DUDLEY:  All right.  Thanks, everyone, for getting on the call today.  If you do have any follow up questions, feel free to direct to me or my colleagues in the Vice President’s press office.  Look forward to updates on the trip and thank you everyone, again.

END 11:43 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 July 24, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces Military Family Cookout
New Hampshire National Guard Headquarters
Concord, New Hampshire
3:45 P.M. EDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Hello.  Thank you, General Reddell, for that warm introduction.  And thank you and your wonderful wife, Becky, for all you’re doing, for your support of the New Hampshire National Guard & Reserve families.  We are delighted to be here and appreciate your hosting us today.  Thank you.
 
And good afternoon everyone!  It’s great to see so many Guard Members, reservists, family members, and friends of the Guard.  I want to also recognize the Gold Star families who are here with us today. 
 
I am Jill Biden, and I am proud to stand here this afternoon as a military mom.  Like you, I come from a small state with a strong National Guard that has shouldered a tremendous burden over the past decade.
 
My son, Beau, is a Captain in the Delaware Army National Guard and he recently spent a year in Iraq, so I know well the challenges that Guard families face when their soldiers are away.  And I also know how much it means when communities rally around family members who are managing in their soldier’s absence.
 
The First Lady and I came here today for a very simple reason: to say thank you to all of you for all of your service.  You and your family -- service members around the country and the world inspire us with your strength and your resilience, and that applies especially to the family members of all ages who are here today.
 
The First Lady and I are working hard through our “Joining Forces” initiative to make sure that every American understands the sacrifices that each of you as family members are making for the security of our nation.
 
And we hope to inspire more communities around the country to reach out to military families like we are doing tonight in Concord and like I saw in Portsmouth later today -- earlier today.
 
We’ve seen some incredible examples of Americans helping out with childcare for military families, lending a hand with accounting during tax season, and hosting baby showers for expectant military moms, and we want to formally applaud these efforts.
 
In fact, I’m excited to share tonight that the First Lady and I are launching the Joining Forces Community Challenge, which will recognize individuals and groups around the country who are making a difference in the lives of military families.
 
We are really excited about this program and hope you will go to our website at joiningforces.gov to learn how you can nominate a group or an individual who has come up with a creative or innovative way to make life a little easier for our military families.  The idea can be large or small, new or old, as long as it demonstrates in some way the tremendous gratitude all of us feel for our military families.
 
Every American has the ability to make a difference in the life of a military family.  That’s what our Joining Forces initiative is all about.
 
And now it’s my honor and privilege to introduce a woman who is a tireless and devoted advocate for our service members, veterans, and military families, my dear friend and our wonderful First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
             
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you all so much.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  How are you guys doing?  Food good?  Have you eaten yet?  Good steak.  (Laughter.)  Oh, awesome.  Can we give the steak a hand?  I mean, come on, good stuff.  (Applause.)  I only had two bites, but I guarantee you after this I’m having some more. 
 
It is great to be back in New Hampshire.  And I want to thank Jill for that very kind introduction.  Jill has been just a tremendous partner in crime in this effort.  She’s a true champion of our men and women in uniform and a singular voice for National Guard and Reserve issues, both inside and outside of the White House, so I would like to give her a round of applause, too.  Yay.  (Applause.)
         
And also I want to recognize General Reddell and, again, everyone from The Meat House for donating all the delicious food, and of course, I want to thank all of you for being here today.
 
I know we have a lot of different folks represented here.  We’ve got folks from the National Guard, we have people from the Army Reserves, the Navy Reserves.  I know we have some members of Gold Star families here, as well.  I know we have moms and dads both in uniform and out of uniform.  And of course we’ve got a lot of kids, who are probably tired of sitting down and listening to grown-ups, right?  I hear that's a Bouncy House, though.  Is there a Bouncy House?  Do you want to be bouncing in the Bouncy House?  (Laughter.)  I say, go for it.  (Laughter.)  Oh, Dad said no.  Never mind.  (Laughter.)  I tried, tried to get you out of there. 
 
So I’m not going to talk long, because Jill and I are going to spend time going table to table, hopefully getting to meet you -- and him, him especially.  (Laughter.) 
 
But the reason why we’re here, as Jill mentioned, is that we have a very simple message, and that is to say:  Thank you.  Thank you for your service.  Thank you for your sacrifice.  Thank you for everything that you have done for our country.
 
And unlike Jill I didn’t grow up in a military household.  But as I’ve traveled this country, visiting military bases and communities and hospitals, I have seen firsthand just what it means to be part of a military family.  You guys are serious.  You all are doing phenomenal things that we want this entire country to know. 
 
You are moms who are trying to build careers while taking night classes.  You’re dads who coach Little Leagues and who help out with projects in your own communities.  You all are teenagers who study hard and take on extra responsibilities when dad or mom is serving overseas.
 
All of you are perfect examples of the 9/11 Generation.  You’ve gone through unprecedented deployments.  You’ve helped to defend our security through a decade of war.  And you’ve strengthened our country not just as National Guardsmen and Reservists, but as teachers and as firefighters and businessmen and women, as well.
 
You represent the very best of America –- a devotion to family, to community, and to country.  And I just want to tell you that Jill and I could not be more inspired by all of you.
You all are the reasons why Jill and I have launched this nationwide initiative that we’re calling Joining Forces because we want this entire country to recognize, and honor, and support our military members and their families.  We want you to know that this country has your back.
 
And we’ve been traveling across the country, talking to the heads of large businesses and nonprofit organizations, working the levers of government, raising public awareness about what you do and how you sacrifice.
 
And we’re not just putting on some press conferences in front of a logo.  I mean, for us this is not just a show.  We’re working hard to take meaningful steps that make a real difference for you and for your families, because we have learned, whether it’s firsthand or from the stories you’ve told us, how hard it can be when a military family is called to move from base to base or city to city.  It means a new job search for your spouse, it means entirely new friends for your kids, it means a whole new routine for your entire family.
 
And we know that it only makes things tougher when you’re also trying to update your professional license to get in line with your new state’s requirements, or you’re wrangling with a school district to make sure that your kids’ previous credits count at their new school. 
 
So we’re trying to get rid of those headaches for you.  That's one of the things that Joining Forces is trying to do.  We’re working with state governments and the Department of Defense to make sure that when you’re transferred your professional licenses and certifications are transferred, too, in every single state.  We’re also working to do the same thing for your kids’ courses and transcripts, because our troops and their families serve our whole country, not just one state at a time. 
 
And with Joining Forces, we’re working on all types of issues that affect your lives, like employment and job training for military spouses, things like better classes for your children consistently across the country, and most importantly reducing the stigma around mental health issues.
 
And so far, I am proud to say that the response has been incredible.  Everyone that we have spoken to wants to get involved.  From the federal government, to our most successful businesses and nonprofit organizations, to the countless individuals who are making a difference in their own neighborhoods, Americans of all kinds are stepping up to make a difference for our military families.
 
And we’re not done.  We are not even close.  We have only just begun.  We’re going to keep pushing on tough, complicated issues that you’ve probably been struggling with for years and years.  We’re going to keep bringing more people and more businesses and more organizations into the fold. 
 
And we want to hear from all of you -- even if it’s as simple as we go around -- we want to hear from you about how we can do this most effectively.  And when we’re gone we want to continue to hear from you, either through the General or from your resource support centers.  We want to know that what we’re doing is actually having impact for you on the ground.  Let us know how we can find new ways to be helpful.  Let us know how we can improve this initiative so that it is really something that matters to you and to your families.  We want to make sure that we’re making a difference in your lives.  We want to make sure that this is something that you feel.
 
So I want to make a deal with you.  You all keep doing what you’re doing, just being outstanding, just being the best that America can be, keep setting an example for the rest of the country, and we’ll keep working to make sure that this initiative lives up to the standard that you all have set.   
 
So thank you again.  We are proud of you.  We want America to know your stories, to know your challenges, to know your successes, because you make us all proud.
 
So thank you all, and God bless, and we’ll get out there and come and shake some hands.  And kids, go play!  Can they -- they can play, they can play.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  (Applause.)
 
END
3:58 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 29, 2011
REMARKS BY DR. JILL BIDEN AT THE LAUNCH OF THE MILITARY SPOUSE EMPLOYMENT PARTNERSHIP, AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY
Good morning everyone. 
Thank you, Andrea, for that kind introduction and for all you do for our country. I am thrilled to be here with all of you today as Second Lady, and also as a proud Blue Star mom.
I’d like to thank the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as well as the senior enlisted advisors and their spouses for their outstanding leadership.  
I’d also like to acknowledge Admiral and Deborah Mullen for their incredible commitment to our Nation’s military families.  We are all grateful to you both – and Deborah, you are a wonderful example of our amazing  military spouses around the globe.
And finally, I’d like to thank our guests of honor, the extraordinary military spouses and families who are here with us today. 
All of us – the business representatives, the military leaders, and the officials from the Chamber of Commerce – all of us are here today because of you.
Over the past two and a half years, the First Lady and I have been honored to meet many military spouses and we have been so inspired by your amazing stories. We have been struck by your strength, your commitment to our country and the strong examples you set for your families, your workplaces, and your communities.
We’re here because we know how much you have to offer – your skills, your work ethic, and your endless energy. 
And we also know about the sacrifices you make - running your households and raising your kids all alone through those long deployments, often while maintaining fulltime jobs of your own.
Every day, our military spouses are giving back to this country.  When their loved ones are called to serve, they serve right alongside them. 
Now we must serve them as well as they serve us.
That’s why, earlier this year, the First Lady and I launched Joining Forces - a nationwide campaign to rally all Americans to recognize, honor and support our military families. 
Groups, individuals, and businesses like those here today are joining forces in areas of employment, education and wellness to help military families.  Companies and organizations like the Chamber, the PTA, the YMCA, the American Heart Association and many others have stepped up with exciting programs to support these families.
We’re Joining Forces with cities and states, encouraging them to adopt policies that help military families. 
We’re Joining Forces with the American people - as neighbors, colleagues, classmates, and community members - urging them to step up and give something back to the military families who’ve given us so much.
And we’re Joining Forces with the federal government and with businesses across the country to improve employment prospects for military families.
Over the past year, the Obama-Biden Administration has been working to implement nearly 50 specific commitments by the federal government to improve the lives of military families – everything from protecting families from financial scams, to improving education for military kids and spouses, to fighting to end homelessness among veterans. 
One of those priorities is to develop career and educational opportunities for military spouses.
And today, with this new Military Spouse Employment Partnership, we are taking a major step forward in achieving that goal. 
I am thrilled that we have 57 companies involved in this partnership, and I’m delighted that 15 more companies have just signed on. 
And I’d like to acknowledge the work of the Chamber of Commerce to support these efforts. 
From sponsoring hiring fairs for veterans and spouses, to creating a mentoring program for 10,000 military wives and servicewomen, to hosting us here today, this organization is playing an important role, and we are all grateful for your support.   
And in the coming months and years, I hope that companies and organizations across America will follow your lead. 
Because the fact is, if you’re looking for hard-working, highly-skilled, educated, and dedicated employees, our military spouses are precisely the employees you need.
So once again, I want to thank the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and all the companies represented here today for their leadership. 
The First Lady and I look forward to working with all of you in the months and years ahead.
Thank you for all you do to support our amazing military families. 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 01, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Italian President Napolitano to the Press in Rome
6:08 P.M. CEST
     PRESIDENT NAPOLITANO:  (As translated.)  Good afternoon.  On the occasion of tomorrow’s celebration here in Rome for the 150th anniversary of the Unification of Italy, we have with us the Vice President of the United States of America, Senator Biden.
     We have just had a very fruitful meeting, and, of course, we’ll be meeting again tomorrow morning at our celebration and at the events that will take place here at the Quirinale Palace tomorrow afternoon and tomorrow evening.
     I must say that we had a very simple talk.  In fact, this is one of the many steps of what I would define as a continued talk; in other words, an open-ended dialogue, a relationship between Italy and the United States.  And I must say that we’ve had many opportunities, and I’ve also had the opportunity to meet at the highest level the representatives of this great country, of this great people.  And I must say that if there was one country that we could not have not invited for our celebrations that would definitely have been the United States of America because America is so close, is so tied to the history of Italians -- of Italy’s unification.  And it is also very close to the rebirth of Italy after fascism.  And there’s always been a very strong tie of friendship, of cooperation and alliance with the United States of America.
     And as I said, it wouldn’t have been possible at all; it would have been unthinkable to hold our celebrations here in Italy without the participation of the United States.  And, in fact, we were told that we would have the Vice President of the United States, a very high-level representative -- Vice President Biden.
     Now, with regard to our talk, I would say that we focused on the recent developments, international developments.  And, of course, we know what has happened with uprisings in North Africa, in the Middle East.  This is a very novel situation, very disrupting situation.  And of course, we also talked about the attack by Colonel Qaddafi against his own people.  And with that attack, he was trying, of course, to thwart the attempt to establish freedom and autonomy in that country, in Cyrenaica, in such a very vital and vibrant part of Libya itself.
     And again, we were working side by side with the United States of America, and Italians were trying to make their contribution even to the military operation that had been authorized by the United Nations Security Council so as to make sure that the freedom movement could continue to operate. 
     This, of course, is an important part of this general process of reawakening in the Arab world.  I must say that we share many assessments and opinions, and once again, I wish to express my gratitude to Vice President Biden for being here today, as well as tomorrow.  Thank you.
     VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you very much.  It’s a genuine honor to be here.  I and President Obama -- I'm delighted that President Obama spent last week in Europe and meeting with you in Warsaw, because that meant I could come to Italy.  He was unable to stay out of the country much longer, and I am flattered that I am able to be here. 
     And as President Obama said in his proclamation marking the anniversary of the unification, he said, “We join with Italians everywhere to honor the courage, sacrifice and vision of the patriots who gave birth to the Italian nation.”
     Folks, it has been -- we’ve had a great meeting.  And our ambassador presented the President with a replica of a letter written by General Garibaldi to Abraham Lincoln in 1861, when at the beginning of our Civil War and the beginning of your unification, where he talked about the relationship -- Garibaldi did -- between our nations.  And under the leadership of your Prime Minister Berlusconi and the President, Italy has been an incredibly important partner, not only in the past -- because I’m not here to talk about the past -- I’m here to celebrate the unification, but to talk about the future.  Both in NATO, and in the G8, and the G20, Italy has been a key coalition ally.  From the beginning in the crisis of Libya, Italy has stood with the United States and others in strong support of the U.N. Resolution 1970 and [19]73. 
     As I said to the President, Italy has deeper roots and a -- I think a greater knowledge of the circumstances in Libya than probably any other country in the world.  And its planes are now helping protect the Libyan people from the brutality of the Qaddafi regime.  And those bases here in Italy that host over 14,000 Americans and 17,000 dependents; those bases are also supporting coalition aircraft; together providing a critical humanitarian assistance to the Libyan people.
     And, Mr. President, even as Italy has supported calls for greater democracy in North Africa and the Middle East, and has helped deal with the humanitarian crises, it’s maintained a critical contribution to Afghanistan, as well as Iraq and Lebanon.
     The sacrifices that Italian troops are making is evident by the injuries recently both in Lebanon and Iraq and Afghanistan, and the President sends his sympathy and good wishes to those who God willing are recovering and to the families of those Italian soldiers for the sacrifices they’re making on behalf of the coalition efforts.
     Let me add that we’re also grateful of the hard work gone in to training Iraqi security forces and Afghan security forces by probably what is recognized as an organization second-to-none, the Carabinieri are second-to-none in the ability to train in paramilitary conditions what is badly needed in both Iraq and in Afghanistan.
     Italian generosity in helping to develop schools and hospitals and cultural institutions are also enabling Afghanistan to build a more secure future and prepare them better as we transition to all-Afghan lead.  And so, again, on behalf of the 14,000 Americans stationed here and over 16,000 family members, we’re profoundly grateful to you, Mr. President, to the Italian government, and to the Italian people for their generosity, their friendship and their partnership.
     And it is truly an honor for me.  I was kidding the President, I said, I may be of Irish heritage, but I was smart enough to marry an Italian girl, an Italian-American.  (Laughter.)
     And so not all of us are slow, Mr. President.  Some of us pick it up very quickly.  And I just want you to know it’s an honor for me.  And we sent you our best.  We sent you David Thorne* as our ambassador who you know well.  David lived in -- in all his formative years here in Rome; I think 17 years or so.  And when we were elected, I think there only -- the most sought-after job in American diplomacy, Mr. President, is to be ambassador to Italy.  And David said he was coming home.  So just make sure you send him back when the term is over, so --
     Again, congratulations on the anniversary.  I look forward to the festivities.  And it’s a great pleasure to be with a man of such integrity, Mr. President.  Thank you.
     PRESIDENT NAPOLITANO:  Thank you very much.  (As translated.)  I have already thanked the Vice President during our talk, but I also wish to thank him in public.  I thank, in fact, Ambassador Thorne for this wonderful gift which I’ve just received.  I must say that, of course, this gift is a gift of great meaning, and it referred to the proclamation by President Obama for March the 17th, and it talks about Giuseppe Garibaldi as being a source of inspiration for those who were fighting for the unity of the United States of America, for the cause of the Union during the Civil War in America.  I do wish to thank you for this wonderful and very symbolic gift.  Thank you very much.
     I don’t have any prejudices, nothing against the Irish, and I am very ready to grant you a title of honorary Italian if you will accept it.
     VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Oh, I accept.  If I die, I’d like to be reborn in Italy, Mr. President.  That's all I can say.  Thank you.  (Applause.) 
END 6:18 CEST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 25, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden Marking the 50th Anniversary of President Kennedy’s “Moon Shot” Speech, As Prepared For Delivery
I want you to imagine—I want you to imagine the benefits to the first country that develops smart anti-cancer therapies that kill cancer cells and leave ordinary cells untouched.
 
Imagine the first country that develops regenerative medicines that can re-grow damaged organs, eliminating the agonizing wait for an organ transplant, allowing patients to recover from spinal cord injuries, and curing diseases like diabetes.  
 
Imagine the first country that makes solar power as cheap as fossil fuels, and builds the first buildings that are able to produce all the energy they consume.
 
Imagine the first country to build a supercomputer capable of performing a million-trillion calculations a second – a computer fast enough to not only sequence every gene in the human body, but to test every combination of genes – giving us a new ability to fundamentally decode the complex interactions between genetics and disease.
 
Imagine the first country that creates a car battery that’s even lighter and cheaper than the new lithium ion batteries of today – able to store enough energy from one charge to take a car 1,000 miles.
 
Of one thing I am convinced:  If President Kennedy were standing here today, this is what he would imagine, this is what he would envision – and then he would challenge America to accomplish all of these goals and more.  He would challenge us to push the boundaries of our own knowledge and our present capacity.  To bridge the gap between the possible and the unimaginable.  
 
For it would have been beyond his comprehension that the United States would fail to invest in visionary new ideas. Ideas needed to make the 21st century livable.
 
I don’t believe he could have imagined the United States continuing to rely on fossil fuels.  I don’t believe he could have imagined the United States failing to cultivate new brilliant young scientists, and to challenge them to end the diseases that have plagued humanity for generations.  
 
In an ever-more complicated and interconnected world, Ladies and gentlemen, I believe if he were standing here today, he would tell us, as he did 50 years ago, that we have a choice about what kind of country we are going to be. That vision should not be a hard sell today, in 2011.  For because of President Kennedy’s vision, leadership, and confidence, we’ve already met such a challenge – by relying on all the resources and talents America possesses today.  
 
50 years ago, President Kennedy said, “I believe we possess all the resources and talents necessary.  But the facts of the matter are that we have never made the national decisions or marshaled the national resources required for such leadership.  We have never specified long-range goals on an urgent time schedule, or managed our resources and our time so as to insure their fulfillment…”
 
He said that we needed,  “a degree of dedication, organization, and discipline which have not always characterized our research and development efforts.”But because of him, we don’t have to say that.  
 
We have made national decisions on this scale and of this magnitude.  We have marshaled the national resources required for such leadership.  We have specified long range goals on an urgent time schedule. Because of the visionary leadership of a young president, we know it can be done. We know we can mobilize to meet the challenges of the moment.
 
I was 18 years old when President Kennedy gave his moon shot speech.  An 18 year old kid from Scranton, who never dreamed that he would one day be standing here to pay tribute to the power and vision and achievement that grew out of President Kennedy’s words that day – and to urge a new generation to honor his actions with our own.  What a great honor.
 
I remember President Kennedy saying it was up to us—up to the nation—to decide whether to commit ourselves to the challenge of sending a man to the moon and bringing him safely back to earth. That if we weren’t going to go for it full tilt, we might as well not go for it at all.
 
In 1961, President Kennedy’s character and makeup was a reflection not only of his generation, but of America’s character. Well, I am confident my generation and yours is not only up to the task – but even better position to meet the daunting challenges of this young century.
 
Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, “Society is like a wave….”America has not changed, it’s gotten better. Nothing incremental.  He had, as I do, an unlimited faith in the character and the aspirations of the American people.  He knew that the American people had never failed to rise to a challenge, never failed to overcome adversity,  and never let their country down.    
 
From a revolution for independence, to a war to keep us united, the throes of a Great Depression, to building and deploying an arsenal of democracy and expanding democracy at home through Civil Rights and civil justice American has always been at its best when challenged.  That’s when you see our national grit.  Determination.  Ingenuity.
 
That’s why President Kennedy said, speaking of the challenge to go to the moon, that if we came together and took up the challenge, then “in a very real sense, it [would] not be one man going to the moon…for all of us must work to put him there.” I knew, as a young man, how bold it was.  How exciting it was. It appealed to America’s essential exceptionalism, the idea that we were a special nation, meant to do extraordinary things.  Even then, my friends,  I sensed that this challenge was about more than landing on the moon.  
 
It was bigger than that.  It was about a truly new frontier.
 
You just knew in your gut that the process of getting there, the pursuit of the moon, would open whole new vistas to humanity.  It would be a new measure of possibility—a new mark of human achievement.
 
President Kennedy knew that going to the moon would change the way we lived on earth.  That it wasn’t about going to a distant world, but bringing the United States into the modern world, and making sure we didn’t lose our place in it. And he was right.
 
The pursuit of the moon inspired thousands in my generation to pursue careers in engineering, science and technology.  It unleashed one of the most significant expansions of scientific capacity the world had ever known.   And my impression was that he never had a doubt that it would.  Because he knew our history.   He knew the equation of America:  challenge plus investment equals progress.
 
A half century later, President Obama and I share that same conviction, that same faith, and that same certitude. For the new frontiers here on earth are equally as challenging, and equally capable of being conquered. A new energy policy that will save the planet from global warming, increase our independence, and renew our economy.  
 
Advances in science and health that will increase the quality of life for millions of Americans and tens of millions of people the world over. This is an incredible time in which we live, a time of extraordinary possibilities.   We are a nation of people who are always about – possibilities.
 
What is truly unique about America is that we have the political system, the economic system, the education system, and, most importantly, the will to turn those possibilities into realities.
 
But like President Kennedy we understand that it takes a national vision, it takes a leader to set the goal, and if he does, investment and innovation, and ultimately, commercialization will follow.  Over and over again, that’s been the American model of innovation, allowing us to lead the world in technological advancement the past 250 years.  It’s part of our nation’s DNA; it’s embedded in our nation’s history.
 
But the goals are not America’s alone. Other nations are seeking to win the future as well. You see it in China and India and Brazil, countries that are making massive investments in research, development, infrastructure, education.  
 
If we shrink from President Kennedy’s bold approach, we run the risk of being left behind.  We and the world are at a critical juncture, and the United States needs to reassert its commitment to competitiveness – competitiveness that puts us in a position to be the global economic leader of the 21st century.
 
That is why President Obama has set such bold goals to meet the challenges of this generation. Think about it:  We know we can be generating 80% of America’s electricity from clean sources by 2035.   We launched what we call a “SunShot” to make solar energy as affordable as traditional forms of energy.  And I assure you, just as in the moonshot – in pursuit of that goal – we will develop new technologies that will leapfrog anything we’re thinking about right now.  
 
We know that with the seed money we’ve already provided through the Recovery Act, that private industry can put a million advanced technology vehicles – electrics and plug-in hybrids – on the road by 2015.  But we also know, along the way, they will develop a whole new generation of batteries that will ultimately be able to carry a car father than 1,000 miles on a single charge – and batteries that can store the energy we harvest from the sun, not only from automobiles but for industrial use as well.  
 
We know that we must and will lead the world in the percentage of college graduates by the end of the decade, because we know our people.  We know America.  There is no reason why, in the 21st century, America cannot have the best educated, best trained population mankind has ever known.  We have the talent, resources, and know-how.
 
In the process of doing all this, your generation will be responsible for fundamental breakthroughs not only in the far reaches of space, or the depths of the sea, in the confines of our own bodies, and in the mysteries of the human brain.
 
A great deal has been written about the advances we’ve made in the last quarter century in understanding the brain functions and the potential that will come from further study.  There’s been a great of research in the last half decade, research that has attracted the interest not only of neuroscientists and surgeons, but gifted persons from other disciplines – psychologists, sociologists, and journalists.
 
One example that I recommend to you all is David Brooks’ new book, “The Social Animal” – that points out with greater understanding of the potential we have to affect social interaction in ways we haven’t ever thought of before.  
 
The promise in this area is unlimited, and the need for further research is immediate.  Thousands of our wounded warriors are retuning with Post Traumatic Stress and Traumatic Brain Injuries. For these and other reasons, our administration has made an unprecedented commitment to advancing understanding of the brain – through the NIH, through the National Science Foundation, through the Department of Defense, and through the VA.  
 
We’re supporting the Human Connectome Project – dedicated to discovering the “wiring diagram” for the human brain. The Human Connectome Project will lead to major advances in our understanding of how our brain circuitry changes as we age and how it differs in people with neurological or psychiatric illnesses.
 
We’re supporting a consortium of researchers to create stem cells from patients with Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, Lou Gehrig’s disease, and Alzheimer’s.  This allows researchers to better understand the progression of these diseases, and to screen potential drug candidates.
 
We’re supporting the development of “neural prosthesis,” which is in the nascent stages of allowing individuals with prosthesis to control them by their thought process.  
 
We’re also supporting Congressman Patrick Kennedy’s bold new campaign, called One Mind for Research.  
 
Many of   today as part of that effort.  Your work truly is a modern moonshot. There’s no question that President Kennedy’s spirit is alive today in this nation, in this audience, and in the DNA of Patrick Kennedy.  

The truth is, just as JFK couldn’t have known that shooting for the moon would create the semiconductor industry, which would give birth to the personal computer industry, which would give us IBM and Microsoft and Apple, who gave us the iPhone – and who knows where this goes next?
 
We cannot know with certainty what our fundamental recommitment to science, and research and development will yield.  But we do know, from experience that the results will be greater than the sum of the parts, and the rewards will be far greater than the original investment. And we also know that the march into the future will continue whether we lead it or not.
 
President Kennedy understood this 50 years ago.  Here’s what he said, “The exploration of space will go ahead whether we join in it or not…and no nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space.”
 
No nation that expects to be the leader of others can afford to be a follower on confronting the critical challenges of today. But just as there were naysayers in 1961, there are naysayers in 2011. They say our economy is too fragile for us to be so bold.  I say, our economy will stay fragile, unless we are bold. They say we cannot afford to invest in these endeavors.  I say, we cannot fail to invest.  
 
This argument is not new to America.  There are those in the political leadership who hold the view that government has no role, and should not be setting out a vision for America’s future. I would argue that at every juncture, they’ve been proven wrong.  
 
If we had listened to those voices in 1774, private enterprise and government would not have collaborated to build the rifles with interchangeable parts needed to win the Revolutionary War.
 
If we had listened to these voices in 1843, Congress never would have collaborated with Samuel Morse build a demonstration telegraph line, from Washington to Baltimore and unleashing a telecommunications revolution.  
 
If President Lincoln had listened to those voices in the middle of the Civil War, he wouldn’t have paid private railroad companies $16,000 dollars for every 40 miles of track on a transcontinental railroad they laid down.  
 
If President Eisenhower had listened to those voices in 1957, he never would have invested millions of government dollars in a new research endeavor called ARPA, which invented the Arpanet, which became the Internet.
 
And if President Kennedy has listened to those voices, we never would have reached for the moon, and reaped the incredible benefits that flowed from that effort. And I assure you that neither President Obama and I are going to listen to those voices, and mortgage the future of your generation.
 
In his inaugural address, President Kennedy said, “In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than in mine, will rest the final success or failure of our course.  Since this country was founded, each generation of Americans has been summoned to give testimony to its national loyalty.”
 
Today, we are summoned again. Let us have the strength, courage, and vision to answer that call.
 
For in the words of President Obama, “We are the ones we’ve been waiting for.”
 
Thank you.  May God bless America.  And may God protect our troops.

   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 19, 2011
Commencement Address by Dr. Jill Biden to Graduates, Family Members, and Faculty of Montgomery County Community College
Good evening everyone…as a Philadelphia-native, it’s great to be back home!
Thank you Dr. Stout and Chairman D’Aniello for inviting me for such an important day. And I also want to offer congratulations to tonight’s other honorary degree recipient, Mr. Mike Bittner.  And wasn’t Antonio great? Thank you for your inspiring words – you are a tough act to follow!
It is an honor and a thrill to be here to celebrate with all of you.
Thanks to the tireless work of you and your team, Dr. Stout, Montgomery County Community College has earned national recognition for its tradition of service to the community, its advanced technology programs, and for its outstanding teachers.
Congratulations, that recognition is very well-deserved.
And today, I congratulate all of you. All of you graduates, all of your proud mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, sons, daughters and friends. You did it!
And I think you all deserve a huge round of applause.
I feel right at home at a community college commencement. Some of you are familiar with my story. As Dr. Stout mentioned, I have spent my career as a teacher and to this day I am a full-time professor at a community college in Northern Virginia, not too far from the White House.
People often ask me why I continue to teach, and my answer is very simple: it’s you. It’s the students. Tales are often told of teachers inspiring students, but I find it is more often the other way around.
On more days and in more ways than I can remember, my students have inspired me with their persistence, their inquisitiveness, and their absolute faith that education will make their lives better.  And I bet your professors here would say the same thing.
Throughout your time at Montgomery County Community College, you have no doubt seen the signs and reminders around campus: ‘Think Big.’ ‘Think Big’ About Your Future.’ ‘Think Big About Your Possibilities.’ ‘Think Big About the Difference You Can Make.’
And over the last couple of years, whether at Blue Bell or at Pottstown, you have risen to that challenge.  You have “thought big” about what you will make of your life and through your hard work you have inspired us all.
You are Karen Vasko, who, after taking care of her elderly father in a hospice, realized she had a natural talent for nurturing others. Karen promised her father that after he died, she would follow her dreams of becoming a nurse.
When he passed away, Karen left her 30-year career in banking to study medical assisting here at the College. And I’m so proud to say, that at the age of 57, Karen recently passed her registration exam with a score of 99 percent and will be graduating to fulfill her dream – and the dream of her father – here today. Karen, I know your father would be so proud of you today.
You are Elizabeth Neuman, who came to the College interested in biotechnology. Thanks to this College’s exceptional biotech program and the relationships she was able to develop with her professors here, Elizabeth was able to work hands-on with lab equipment, develop her own techniques, and prepare herself for a terrific career. And I’ve learned that she has recently been hired as a research assistant at a biotech company, congratulations Elizabeth!
And you are Brian Lukens, who took a break from college in 2004 to enlist in the U.S. Marine Corps.  After serving two tours of duty in Iraq, Brian returned to study here at Montgomery full-time, while still serving as a reservist and a full-time security employee in order to support his family.
It’s people like Brian and his family who show us what words like “service,” “strength,” and “sacrifice” really mean on a daily basis.
Brian, you and your fellow service members across the country inspire all of us – including me and First Lady Michelle Obama.  We are working hard to make sure the rest of the country understands how important your leadership is to the future of our nation.  And we will stand by your families – and all our military families – no matter where your future missions take you.  As an Army mom myself, I want to say to you and your family, Brian: Thank you for your service.
You all came to this college at many different stages in life, but, today, after hard work and sacrifice, long hours and sleepless nights, you all walk across the same stage, having accomplished something no one can ever take away from you.
Every year, I meet students who have doubts, who are unsure of their destinies, unaware of the abilities they possess. And every year, around this time, I see those same students, in caps and gowns, walk across the stage and receive a diploma as you will today, knowing that, yes, they cast those doubts aside, and, yes, they did what they set out to do.
It’s a feeling you can get at most universities, yes, but it’s especially strong at community colleges—where the gap between what is imagined at the beginning and what is achieved at the end can be so wide.
The joy of watching you close those gaps is exactly why I am a community college professor.
The education you received here at Montgomery County Community College goes so far beyond the four corners of a diploma.  So far outside the pages of an English textbook or the walls of a computer lab.
What you have gained here is the confidence it takes to succeed, the knowledge that, hey, I set out to do this, and I did it, and now I can do so much more.  No matter if you are a budding biotech expert, a 57-year-old banker or a young reservist coming back from deployment.
Years from now, you may not be able to recall a certain scientific formula, or recite those verses from Shakespeare. You may not immediately be able solve the complex calculus problems you’ve conquered here.  But I have no doubt in my mind that you will be able to say, “No matter what is put in front of me, I can do it.” You’ve done it here. You can do it anywhere.
I’ve been lucky enough to witness firsthand the power of community colleges to change lives, first as a community college teacher but now as part of an Administration that also recognizes their value.  President Obama has set a goal of leading the world in college graduates by 2020.  And he knows that community colleges are key to reaching that goal – and you all are living proof. 
There are close to 1,500 of you graduating today—the most in the College’s history.  Some of you will go on to four-year universities; some to graduate school; and others into the workforce.  But I hope for each of you that the education you received here will spark a quest for discovery that will last a lifetime.  
As the Irish poet William Butler Yeats said, “Education is not the filling of a bucket but the lighting of a fire.”
So no matter where you go, I urge you to embrace that fire.  Embrace that fire, that new confidence, and pass it on. Inspire others by showing them the good that can come from a great education. Show them what they are capable of when they work hard doing what they love, and light that fire anew for so many more.
Congratulations, graduates, and good luck in all that you do!
Thank you so much.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 15, 2011
Commencement Address by Dr. Jill Biden at Salve Regina University
Newport, Rhode Island
Sunday, May 15, 2011
Thank you Nuala, and thank you Sister Gerety. It is such an honor and a thrill to be with you this morning.
 
My husband Joe and I had the privilege of knowing Nuala and Claiborne quite well, as the two men served in the Senate together for over 25 years.     
 
One of my fondest memories of Senator Pell comes from the times we traveled together with members of the Senate Foreign Relations committee. Many of you wouldn’t know this, but I’m an avid runner, so I always bring my running gear with me wherever I go. Senator Pell once saw me dressed for a run and asked if he could join me.  I said, of course he could.  But I was quite surprised when … he showed up in an oxford button-down shirt, Bermuda shorts, black socks, and black leather shoes. I said, “Claiborne—I thought we were going jogging?”  And he looked at me, and said, “Why yes—we are.”
 
So I’ll never forget jogging around Rome with a tall, lean man in leather shoes.  And I bet some of you here remember seeing Claiborne jogging through his beloved Newport in similar attire. He was such an endearing man, wasn’t he Nuala?
 
On a more serious note, Senator Pell was one of the most distinguished senators in our nation’s history, leaving an incredible legacy in international relations and -- in an area close to my heart - higher education. It’s for this legacy that we are all indebted to him today.
 
This year, as has been true for many years now, all across this nation, in cities and towns thousands of miles away from here, families are saying a word of thanks to a Senator they never knew or met because a Pell Grant helped open the door to college.
 
Claiborne Pell believed in the transformative power of education.
 
You might not realize it now, but you’ve all been transformed by education.  
 
Your best professors have inspired you. Your peers have motivated you to be better than you ever imagined. And your favorite courses have literally altered the path you will take in life.  As a lifelong student myself and now as a community college professor, I know this from my own experience.
 
Some of you are familiar with my story. I’ve been a teacher for 30 years, and I continue to teach full-time at a community college in Northern Virginia, not too far from the White House.
 
People often ask me why I teach, and my answer to this is simple: it’s you. It’s the students.  Tales are often told of teachers inspiring students, but I find it is more often the other way around:  my students have inspired me, each and every day.  And I bet your professors here would say the same thing about you.
 
Though my students may differ in age and background from many of you, their stories, their dreams, are ultimately the same as yours.
 
They are the stories of education changing lives, building confidence, and opening doors. They are stories of young men and women who embody your school’s mission statement: “working for a world that is harmonious, just and merciful.”
 
You are living up to that motto.  And in doing so you are inspiring us all.  By changing your own life through your education, you are readying yourself to change the world for others.
 
You are Courtney Richards, Cadet Company Commander, one of the three ROTC graduates with us here today. Even though you transferred to Salve Regina just two years ago, you’ve quickly become one of the most respected and beloved students by your peers, by faculty, and by ROTC personnel. It’s because, on a daily basis, you show us what words like “service,” “strength,” and “sacrifice” really mean.
 
You and your fellow cadets across the country inspire all of us – including me and First Lady Michelle Obama.  We are working hard to make sure the rest of the country understands how important your leadership is to the future of our nation.  And we will stand by your families – and all our military families – no matter where your future missions take you.  As an Army mom myself, I want to say to you and your family, Courtney: Thank you for your service.
 
You are Kelsey Fitzgibbons, Evan Gallo, and Megan Welsh, who, after hearing and seeing the devastation in Haiti, decided to do something to help and used their creativity to bring the campus community together for a common cause. They started Salve Hearts for Haiti, which raised more than $21,000 to rebuild a primary school in Haiti, rebuilding that nation starting with the gift of education. I visited Haiti shortly after the earthquake and saw the destruction first hand, and I know how important it is to rebuild that country’s education system.
 
And you are Dan Royce, a basketball player here who worked multiple jobs to pay for your education and still found time here and there to volunteer with the Special Olympics. And I am proud to say that Dan is a future teacher.
 
Service member.  Activist.  Teacher.  Not to mention the doctors, the scientists, the writers, the public servants, the businessmen and -women you are all about to become – and all because of this magnificent institution and the people that have inspired you here.
 
As the poet William Butler Yeats said, “Education is not the filling of a pail, but the lighting of a fire.”  And I ask you today to keep that fire burning brightly as you leave the steps of McKillop Library.
 
I urge you to embrace that fire and do what you love, and just as important, inspire others to love that something else, too.
 
While the vast majority of you are not going to be teachers in a classroom next year—I believe that you can teach or mentor or inspire someone in your lives. In fact, I hope you do.
 
I have no doubt each one of you has the power to inspire a future generation of business leaders, artists, statesmen, and scientists, to pass on this gift of education to others, to light that fire anew, for so many more.
 
I recently received a letter from a former student of mine who said that her time in my classroom inspired her to become a teacher at a community college in North Carolina.  She wrote in her letter: “More than ever, I feel like I am changing lives.”
 
The truth is, you don’t have to be a teacher to feel that way.  You can change lives doing many things.  You have that potential, each and every one of you, doing whatever it is you do best.
 
It was the founder of this beautiful state, Roger Williams, who once said: “The greatest crime in the world is not developing your potential. When you do what you do best, you are helping not only yourself, but the world.”
 
You owe it to your professors, to your school.  You owe it to the families who are just dying to hug you right now, and to the friends all around you, itching to celebrate with you.  But most importantly, you owe it to yourself.  Keep the fire lit—and lit brightly-so others can follow the trails you blaze.
 
Congratulations, graduates, and good luck in all that you do!
 
Thank you all so much.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 09, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to the Opening Session of the U.S.-China Strategic & Economic Dialogue
9:50 A.M. EDT
 
     THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Good morning.  Thank you.  Thank you, all.  It’s an honor to welcome back to Washington for the third meeting of the Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the United States and China, two good friends.
 
     Let me acknowledge the co-chairs at the outset here.  Vice Premier Wang and State Counselor Dai, welcome back.  I got an opportunity to spend some time with you -- not as much as my colleagues have -- but your trip with President Hu was a great visit, and we got a chance to spend some time together.
 
     The United States co-chairs are our A-Team, our superstars:  Secretary Clinton and Secretary Geithner, two of the best America has to offer, so we expect great things to happen.  We expect great things to happen with the four of you.
 
     Ladies and gentlemen, we each have a number of important tasks in the days ahead and all designed to continue to guide our relationship to an even better place than it’s already moved.
 
     I also would like to recognize, by the way, Secretary Gary Locke, the President’s choice to be our next ambassador to China.  Gary has served with distinction in the Cabinet, as well as before that serving as the governor of the state of Washington.  And I know that once the Senate confirms Gary, and I expect that to be quickly, he’ll do an outstanding job in Beijing.  (Applause.)  There he is.
 
     And I’m not going to mention the Trade Representative sitting next to you because I told him if he was able to deliver a deal on -- with Korea, I would nominate him for the Nobel Peace Prize.  (Laughter.)  He did and I have to.  (Laughter.)
 
Any rate, I’ve made my -- I hate to acknowledge this, gentlemen, but I made my first trip to China as a young man, meeting with Deng Xiaoping in 1979, in April of ’79.  I was privileged to be with what I guess I’m now part of, a group of very senior senators at that time.  I think we were the first delegation to meet after normalization -- with senators like Jacob Javits of New York, and Frank Church, and a number of other very prominent members.
 
     And on that trip when we met with then Vice Premier Deng and witnessed the changes that were being initiated, beginning to spark China’s remarkable -- absolutely remarkable transformation, even back then it was clear that there was -- that great things were happening.  And there was also a debate -- there was a debate here in the United States and quite frankly throughout most of the West as whether a rising China was in the interest of the United States and the wider world.  As a young member of a Foreign Relations Committee, I wrote and I said and I believed then what I believe now:  That a rising China is a positive, positive development, not only for China but for America and the world writ large.
 
     When President Obama and I took office in January of 2009 we understood -- we understood absolutely clearly that our relationship with China would be a key priority.  The President and I were determined -- determined to set the relationship on a stable course that could be sustained for decades.  Our two countries, now the world’s two largest economies, were bound by ever-growing ties of commerce and investment.  We, the United States, we always talk about what we import; we, the United States, exported $110 billion in American goods and services to China last year.
    
     But we’re bound my much more than commerce.  Over the last three decades, our people have become increasingly linked through education, through work and through travel.  Last year, 130,000 Chinese were studying in the United States.  They’re really good.  We’re going to try to keep some of them.  I’m only joking.  I’m only joking.  (Laughter.)  But they are.  (Laughter.)
 
     We cannot claim the same number of Americans in China, but our 100,000 Strong Initiative will dramatically increase the number of young Americans living and studying in China.  As a matter of fact, my niece who -- excuse me, as we say in the Senate, a point a personal privilege -- who graduated from Harvard not too long ago, works for Secretary Geithner, she did exactly what we hope another 100,000 will do:  She studied Chinese and went and lived in China and is now devoted to making sure the relationship gets better and better and better.
 
     And we’re linked by our shared global responsibilities.  We both serve as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.  We’re both Pacific powers.  And for many of the world’s pressing challenges, it’s a simple fact, that when the United States and China are not at the table, the solution to the problem is less possible than when we are at the table.  It’s no exaggeration to say that our relationship and how we manage it will help shape the 21st century.
 
     Our commitment starts at the top.  Our Presidents have met face-to-face nine times in two and a half years.  Nine times.  President Hu, as I mentioned, was just here in January for what all would acknowledge was a very successful state visit.  I’ll go back to China this summer at the invitation of Vice President Xi, and I’m looking forward to hosting the Vice President for a reciprocal visit later this year.   
    
     Even these frequent visits and summits, though, as you all know, are not enough on their own to sustain and build a relationship across our entire government, across all agencies.  That's why we’re here.  It’s not merely, merely our mil-to-mil or economic issues.  We want to build a relationship across the entire spectrum of our governments.  That’s why we’ve asked all of you to come together for these dialogues.
 
     When President Obama launched the first strategic and economic dialogue in 2009, he issued a challenge to all of us to work together to address some of the defining problems of our time.  Some would say that's somewhat presumptuous for China and the United States to decide we’re going to work on the defining problems, but as I said earlier, how we cooperate will define in significant part how we deal with the challenges that the world face in the beginning of the 21st century.
 
     This is at the heart of our effort to build a cooperative partnership.  We seek to cooperate to advance our mutual interests in not only promoting economic growth that is strong, sustainable and balanced, but trade that is free and is fair.  We seek cooperation to advance our mutual interests in the prosperous future that will come from an energy supply that's clean and secure and addresses climate change.
 
     And we seek to cooperate to advance our mutual interests in a range of pressing global and regional security challenges.  This includes continuing our work to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and specifically to curb proliferation of those weapons and technology from both Iran and North Korea.
 
     Where do we stand two years after the President issued his challenge that we cooperate more?  Through this dialogue and the dedicated efforts of our governments and our people, I believe history will show we’ve made progress.
 
     But there's much more to do, and that's why we’re here.  Along with our partners in the G20, we’ve worked to sustain global economic recovery.  We’ve recognized that the United States-China relations generate global economic benefit, not just to both our countries, but global benefit.
 
     Last year our trade with China supported over 500,000 jobs here in the United States, and we made tangible progress during President Hu’s visit, especially in the areas of innovation, intellectual property, and exports, all of which we’re following up on.
 
     Over the next two days, we need to build on this momentum and to make sure our commitments are aggressively implemented so we can continue to move.
 
You may have noticed that there is a debate in this nation how best to secure America’s long-term fiscal future.  We know that overcoming our economic challenges begin at home.  We in the United States have to restore financial stability and we need to make the investments necessary, as well, to win the future.  We need to maintain our commitment to what we believe, the President believes, is the pillars of our economic future:  education, innovation, and infrastructure.
 
I know that you’re adjusting to your economy in the world situation as well.  I know that in China you're working to rebalance your economy and make growth more sustainable, with greater reliance on domestic demand.  None of this is easy.  But success in re-orienting growth will be not only good for China, in our humble opinion, but it will be good for the United States and for the rest of the world.
 
The United States and China are the world’s largest producers and consumers of energy and we share the common challenges that flow from that.  And this creates not only a problem, but great opportunity -- great opportunity for common efforts to find clean energy solutions.  Secretary Chu likes to say -- and I love this expression -- “Science is not a zero-sum game.”  Science is not a zero-sum game.  That amply is illustrated by the remarkable cooperation we've begun to forge in this area.  Let me just mention one example.
 
Our joint Clean Energy Research Center is funding new approaches to energy efficiency, clean coal -- which we both need to deal with -- and clean vehicles.  We need to build on and expand our efforts in this area, and I know you’ll be doing -- having much discussion these next two days on that area, and it seems to me an area where there’s potential for great progress.
 
On global security challenges, we've also made progress.  President Hu joined us at the Nuclear Security Summit -- in January, we signed the memorandum of understanding to build a center for excellence to promote nuclear security in China.  We have cooperated in stemming nuclear proliferation from both Iran and North Korea, including preventing sensitive technologies from being exported to both those countries.
 
The strategic dialogue is important to both our countries.  Just look at the agenda that you have for the next two days.  It’s a fulsome agenda.  To list just a few of the topics on the agenda for the next two days -- and it illustrates the sheer breadth of our relationship:  Climate change; clean energy; mil-to-mil operations -- our military relationships; regional issues such as Sudan and Afghanistan.
 
Our goal -- our goal, in part, is to enhance the communication and understanding that we believe, and I believe you believe, will build trust and confidence.  We have to be honest with each other.  We are not going to agree on everything; we will clearly find areas where there will still be disagreement.  But as we work to advance our respective national interest, we have to move on what we seek in common, find the common ground, and I would argue much of our mutual national interest will find common ground.  But only by discussing a diverse range of topics, including sensitive ones, can we help mitigate the risk of misperception and miscalculation.
 
My father used to say the only disagreement worse than one that is intended is one that is unintended.  That's why it’s so critically important we talk to one another honestly.  We should be realistic; we won't always be able to work together.  In some areas we have vigorous disagreement.  In some we'll have vigorous competition.  In still others we'll have vigorous collaboration.
 
     But I believe on balance we have much more to agree on than to disagree on, and so does the President believe that.  A healthy competition, in our view, is good for both of us.  Competition is not bad.  Competition that’s healthy is good.
 
     This is the reason why I’ve held the view for so many years and continue to hold the view that a rising China is a positive development.  As you might expect, it’s my -- I have overwhelming confidence in the capabilities of the American people.  And those capabilities are enhanced when there’s genuine competition from equally capable people.  I welcome this healthy and fair competition because I believe we’ll see it will spur us both to innovate and both will benefit from it.
 
As I’ve said earlier, it’s important to be straightforward with one another.  There is one area where we have vigorous disagreement.  And I know and I understand that disagreement, when we voice it, is upsetting or rankles -- I don’t know how that translates into Chinese -- but how it concerns some of our friends in China.  We have vigorous disagreement in the area of human rights.
 
We’ve noted our concerns about the recent crackdown in China, including attacks, arrests and the disappearance of journalists, lawyers, bloggers and artists.  And again, no relationship that’s real can be built on a false foundation.  Where we disagree, it’s important to state it.  We’ll continue to express our views in these issues, as we did in the Human Rights Dialogue in Beijing two weeks ago.
 
Now, look, as I said, I recognize that some in China see our advocacy as -- human rights as an intrusion and Lord only knows what else.  But President Obama and I believe strongly, as does the Secretary, that protecting fundamental rights and freedoms such as those enshrined in China’s international commitments, as well as in China’s own constitution, is the best way to promote long-term stability and prosperity of any society.
 
The transformation of China’s economy and society since my first trip as a young man in 1979 has truly been breathtaking.  I doubt whether it’s occurred at any other period in world history -- it’s been so significant and so rapid.  The immense talent of the Chinese people, the incredible hard work and perseverance of the Chinese people and their leaders have literally lifted tens of millions of people out of poverty and built an economy that now helps fuel the world’s prosperity.  It’s remarkable.
 
During this same period, the relationship between the United States and China has also seen a remarkable transformation -- again, through the talent, hard work and respected political leaders who have governed our countries over the last three decades.
 
The bonds between our country -- our countries come about through -- have come about through intense engagement from the moment of normalization -- events like this one.  We’ve already done much to make our relationship positive, cooperative, and comprehensive.  And I’m absolutely confident that we can do more for ourselves and for generations of Americans and Chinese as well.
 
And as I said, presumptuous of me to say this, if that occurs and continues to occur, it will benefit the whole world.  So now it’s time to get to work.
 
Again, welcome, gentlemen; welcome to your delegations.  And I thank you all for the honor of being able to address you.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)
END
10:07 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 06, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Mother's Day Tea for Military Spouses
3:15 P.M. EDT

DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Patty, for that warm introduction and for all you do for military families, and especially the children.  I always love seeing you, and I’m so delighted to see you here today.  Thank you.

Good afternoon.

AUDIENCE:  Good afternoon.

DR. BIDEN:  It’s so nice to see so many friends here.  I’m Jill Biden, and I’m a proud military mom and grandmom.  And it’s a special honor to welcome you all to the White House today.

This has been quite a week, hasn’t it?  (Laughter.)  Yesterday I joined my husband at the Pentagon to commemorate the victims of the attacks on 9/11.  None of us will ever forget that day.  But the heroic actions in Pakistan earlier this week reminded all Americans of the extraordinary courage that our military service members and their families demonstrate on a daily basis.

On Sunday night, as I was -- after the President made his announcement, I was -- it was late, and I was outside waiting for my husband.  I had on my bathrobe, and I was sitting on the steps of our residence, and I could hear in the distance -- because there were so many people that were outside -- and I could hear them at the gates that opened to our driveway, and there were people there singing, “God Bless America.”  And it really just renewed what we all know -- just really -- it just brought this country together.  And I think it was such a great feeling.

We and the entire nation are so proud of all of you.
Michelle and I are thrilled to have you here at the White House today as we express the thanks of our entire nation for those who serve.  You are all heroes -- from the moms who keep their families together while your loved ones are serving overseas, to the grandparents who step in with much needed support, to the siblings and children who are strong and brave while mom or dad is away.

Just last month I attended a deployment ceremony where I met some folks I now call, “The Grandparents.”  Both parents of three children under the age of 10 were deploying, and these grandmothers decided to circle the wagons and take care of those children.  What a relief it is for those parents to know that their children are being taken care of by their grandparents, and what a gift to the children to be surrounded by love while both of their parents are deployed.

Last summer, I traveled to Iraq with my husband, Joe, to visit our troops during the Fourth of July.  I had lunch with several female soldiers, many of whom were mothers.  These women were managing all the challenges of parenting  -- arranging health care, childcare, and education -- thousands and thousands of miles away from their homes and loved ones.

One woman across the table fought back tears as she told me that she was missing out on taking her youngest daughter to college.  I was at a loss for words.  All I could do at that moment was just reach across that table and grab her hand.

Michelle and I have both been struck by these women fiercely proud to serve their country and never complaining, but still struggling with some of the everyday challenges we all face in managing a home and a family.

You here today, and all the women we have met in our travels, are doing your part.  The government is working hard to do its part.  And each American also has the ability to make a difference in the life of a military family.  That’s what our Joining Forces initiative is all about.

And now, it’s my honor and privilege to introduce a woman who is doing her part as a strong leader and a constant advocate for our service members, veterans, and military families.  I have had the privilege of traveling with our First Lady to meet military families across this country, and I’ve seen firsthand how committed she is to doing everything she can to support them.  I feel so fortunate to have her as a partner in this effort and to have her as my dear friend -- our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)

MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you, everyone.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you all so much.  Please rest, enjoy the tea.  Welcome to the White House.  Isn’t this great?  It’s fabulous.  (Applause.)  And everyone looks amazing.  (Laughter.)  It’s like a room full of bursting flowers.  And we have our little ladies -- you guys have your pinkies up, everyone’s pinkies up?  (Laughter.)  Or something like that.  (Laughter.)

We're delighted to have you here.  Let me start by recognizing my partner in so much -- and I didn’t know that this woman would be not just a partner but a friend, a Blue Star mom herself who has been sending out the call, educating this country long before she stepped into this role, focusing the nation on the sacrifices of the families -- Dr. Jill Biden.  Let’s give her a round of applause.  (Applause.)

And Patty.  Patty has been a tremendous advisor to Jill and I throughout this entire process, and she is amazing and knowledgeable, and she is going to be a critical component of Joining Forces.  And we are so proud of her and her service.  Let’s give Patty a hand.  (Applause.)

And finally, I want to thank all of you.  Thank you.

I know it’s pretty exciting to be having tea at the White House in the East Room.  But believe it or not, we are just as excited, and probably more excited, to have you all here.  I mean, it is really -- we love you all.  We really, really do.  And that’s because over the last two years, as Jill said, we have been inspired by all of you in so many ways.  Spending time with our men and women in uniform and their families has been the highlight of our work in these roles.

We’ve been moved by your strength and your spirit, by your courage and, more importantly, by your sacrifice.  And as you have opened your arms and your hearts to me -- which you have so fully, and I feel it and I know it.  I'm not a Blue Star mom or a Gold Star mom, but you all have scooped me up in ways that I wouldn’t have imagined.

You’ve also opened my eyes to what being part of a military family is truly all about.  You’ve shown me what it takes for one parent to do the job of two -- juggling the carpools and the soccer practices on top of many of you handling the work of a full-time job and all the rest that goes into running a household; caring for a loved one who’s been injured, or mourning a spouse or a child who never made it home.

And I know that there are people in the room today who feel a little sad because this Mother’s Day is a little less than what you’d hope.  And all we can do is hug you and tell you that we are thinking and praying and working for you all, and we are proud of you.  And some of you are, as Jill said, grandparents caring for a grandchild.  And others of you have served in uniform yourselves.

You’ve shown us what it takes to be a military child, many of you -- changing and leaving friends behind every few years; trying to keep up with homework and activities; and trying to lead the life of a normal kid while worrying about a parent or a sibling who is in harm’s way.  And as Jill reminded us just this past week, as Americans everywhere stood in awe at the bravery of the soldiers who carried out that daring operating in Pakistan, it was also a moment for all of us to remember that everyone who serves is able to do so because of the love and support of their families.

And what you do is not easy.  I won’t even say it’s not always easy.  I don’t think it’s ever easy.  I know that every day you deal with things that most of us can only imagine.  But I also know that along with incredible challenges come incredible strength.  That's something else that I know from you all.

Roseanna Yamashita and her daughter Tyler are some of you who know what I’m talking about.  With a father serving in the army, Tyler is only a junior in high school, but she’s already attended 10 schools on three continents.  And next year, the Yamashitas are moving to Germany.  But Tyler and Roseanna never complain -- as none of you do.  They know it’s part of serving their country.

And then there’s Helen Norberg and her daughter Julia.  They know a thing or two about what I’m talking about.  When Julia had to deploy to Iraq, Helen was there every day to help take care of their three-year-old grandson Isaiah.  She enrolled him in gymnastics, probably just to settle him down.  (Laughter.)  She took him to his first dentist appointment.  And since the only time Julia and Isaiah could speak was during the day, Helen would often leave work, drive to Isaiah’s school with her cell phone, just so he could hear his mom’s voice.

And then, last year as Julia’s deployment was coming to an end, Helen’s house was destroyed by a tornado.  Helen jumped on top of Isaiah to protect him.  She broke two vertebrae in her back.  When the storm died down, Isaiah had nothing but a small scratch on his arm.  And as Julia said, she has been the best grandmother and mother any soldier could ask for.  (Applause.)

And there are stories like this at every table, in every one of your households, in every one of your lives.  I know that.  These are only examples of what you live every day.  So make no mistake about it, even if you’re not the ones wearing the uniform, every single one of you is serving our country.  And every single one of you deserves our support -- not just with words, but with deeds.  Now, words are good.  They help.  Deeds are better.  (Laughter.) Real concrete actions that make a difference for you at your workplaces, in your schools, and in your communities.

And that’s why last month, Jill and I -- with Patty’s help and so many others -- we started Joining Forces, a nationwide campaign to rally this country to recognize, honor, and support our military families.  We’re joining forces across this country, and we’re calling on all Americans to ask themselves just one simple question:  How can I give back to these families who have given me so much?

We’re joining forces across the federal government, building on over 50 commitments that departments and agencies have made for how they can better serve military families.  We’re going to be joining forces with cities and states, encouraging them to adopt policies that will help you all.

We’re joining forces with organizations like the national PTA and the Military Child Education Coalition, to improve school outreach to military kids.  We’re joining forces with businesses and nonprofits, getting commitments from companies like Walmart and Sears to help military spouses find and keep jobs.

And we’re joining forces with families and communities.  We’re urging people to do whatever they can as neighbors, colleagues, and classmates to lend a hand to military families.

We believe that this is what you deserve from us, because showing our gratitude to those who serve our nation whether it’s on the battlefield or at home, is something that every single American can do.  And it’s something that every single American should do.

So, to everyone here, I just want to say thank you.  This is a very small way to say thank you.  Thank you for your strength, your commitment.  Thank you for setting an example for the rest of us.  It has been such a pleasure getting to meet all of you.

So let’s stop crying -- because I’m about to cry again.  (Laughter.)  Let’s just stop now.  (Laughter.)  And remember, it is Mother’s Day.  So today is a non-“Let’s Move!” day.  (Laughter.)  Eat all the cookies you want.  (Applause.)  And enjoy this weekend.  Continue to take care of each other.  We love you.  We are proud of you.  And we will keep working.

So thank you all.  Take care.  (Applause.)

END
3:30 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 14, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces with USO and Sesame Street event
Veterans Memorial Auditorium
Columbus, Ohio
6:32 P.M. EDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you, Elmo and Katie.  And thank you to the USO, Sesame Street, and Nick Jonas for supporting Joining Forces.  Weren’t they terrific?  (Applause.)
 
It’s so great to be here in Columbus tonight.  I can see a lot of children in the audience.  Can you raise your hand if you’re part of a military family?  Can we have a big round of applause for all our military kids?  (Applause.)  Thank you, kids, for all that you do.  I know just how proud you are of your moms and dad in uniform.
 
But we are all so proud of you.  I’m especially pleased to be here today as the mother of an Army National Guardsman.  (Applause.)
 
I want to thank General McKinley and his wife, Cheryl, and all the other adjutants general for your work on behalf of the National Guard families.  (Applause.)
 
And I want to say a big welcome home to the Marines of the Lima Company.  You make us so proud!  (Applause.)
 
Michelle and I came here today to say thank you to all you servicemembers and your families, and we hope to inspire more communities out around the country to reach out to our military families just like we are doing tonight.  We can all join forces.
 
And now I want to introduce my partner in this effort and my good friend, our First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Wow!  Thank you so much.  (Applause.)  And thank you to Jill Biden, my partner and my friend.  Let’s give Jill a round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
Like Jill, I am thrilled to be here in Columbus with all of you.  And I want to recognize your mayor, Mayor Michael Coleman, who’s here tonight.  Yay, Mayor Coleman!  (Applause.)
 
I also want to thank -- and this is important -- the Franklin County Veterans Memorial Theater -- (applause) -- because you know what, they donated this space for this event tonight.  So let’s give them a round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
And we couldn’t do this night without the USO and Sesame Street and of course our dear, dear friend, Nick Jonas.  Again, let’s give them another big hand.  (Applause.)
 
And I also want to thank all of you, those military kids and your moms and your dads that are in the audience.  You all are a guest of honor this evening.  We did all of this for you.  You’re the reason that we’re here.  And I think that, again, we have to give you guys another big round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
And finally I also want to thank all of the community members that are here tonight.  There are a lot of community members who came out tonight because even though you may not be part of a military family yourself, you still feel a whole lot of gratitude and respect for those who are.  I know you do. 
 
And that's why Jill and I have launched Joining Forces.  We launched it Tuesday.  This is our nationwide campaign to recognize, honor and support America’s military families.  We want to give back to these families that have given all of us so much.  So we’re going to join forces across the federal government.
 
We’re joining forces with businesses like Sears and Kmart.  We’re joining forces with organizations like the PTA and the YMCA.  (Applause.) 
 
But most importantly, this effort is about all of us joining forces as Americans, as neighbors, and colleagues, and classmates.  And the motto for this effort is very simple.  Jill and I believe that everyone -- everyone -- can do something, even boys and girls.  Everyone can do something to support a military family.  And everyone can ask themselves, what can I do?  How can I give back? 
 
If you’re a kid, you can ask your teacher if your class can do a project to support military families.  If you’re a parent, maybe you can tell that military mom down the street that you’ll take her shift in the carpool, or maybe mow the lawn, or start a group at your place of worship to help lighten the load for these families during deployments.
 
And when you get home, I want you all to log on to joiningforces.gov and see how you can get involved.
 
In the end, I know that if we all work together, if we all join forces, then we can serve our military families as well as they’ve served us.
 
Thank you all so much.  We are so proud of you.  We love you.  We’re going to come down and shake some hands.  (Applause.)
 
END
6:37 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 14, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces Employment Event
Sears Distribution Center
Columbus, Ohio
4:47 P.M. EDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Hi.  Good afternoon, everyone.  And thank you, Christina, for that kind introduction.  And thank you for your service.
           
My name is Jill Biden, and I’m a proud military mom.  It’s great to be here today and to see so many service members, military families, and veterans.  Thank you all for your service and your sacrifice to this country.  I’m also pleased to see representatives from local businesses and community organizations here today who are doing their part to honor and recognize service members and their families.
  
Over the past two years, Michelle and I have had the privilege of traveling around the country and around the world, visiting with service members and military families and hearing their stories firsthand.  Most of them talk about how proud they are to serve our country. 
 
But there are also challenges that come along with this service.  Frequent moves can be difficult for children who have to switch schools and for spouses who are pursuing an education or trying to get ahead in a career.
 
Last year, I met Alicia, an amazing young nurse -- student nurse from North Carolina.  She managed to finish her nursing degree while caring for her critically-injured husband at -- excuse me -- Brooke Burn Center in Texas.  She triumphed, despite unimaginable circumstances, moving across the country, caring for her husband and completing her degree.
 
As her story demonstrates, our military families are strong.  They are incredibly resilient.  And they are some of the most valuable members of our American workplace.
 
Part of what Michelle and I are doing with “Joining Forces,” is showing Americans how organizations and businesses like the groups here today are reaching out and doing their part.  That’s why we’re here today.
 
Michelle and I have talked a lot about the ways that all Americans can support our troops and thank these men and women for their service.  And all of you are using the workplace to do just that. 
 
I’ve seen, through my work with a grassroots organization in Delaware, that small community groups can make a huge difference.  There are many small and effective groups like this all over the country, from the barbecue master who travels through your state of Ohio to cook for military families, to the accountants providing free tax service, which is timely, to the soldiers in Minnesota collecting hockey equipment for military kids.
 
The organizations here today who are supporting our troops and families are showing all Americans that there are countless ways to help -- some large and many small, but all important, and I can tell you from personal experience, all appreciated. 
 
We can all join forces.  You are doing your part.  The government is doing its part.  And each American has the ability to make a difference in the life of a military family.  That’s what this initiative is all about.
 
It is now my pleasure to introduce my partner and dear friend, a woman we are fortunate enough to call our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you everyone.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you all so much.  Thank you, please.  First of all, let me thank Jill, not just for that very kind introduction, but for being such a tremendous partner in this effort.  This has been something that Jill and I have worked on together for years.  She brings a wealth of expertise as a Blue Star mom.  And her passion and focus on this issue has really helped get this thing off the ground.  So let’s give her another big round of applause.  (Applause.)
 
I also want to thank Secretary Solis and Lou D’Ambrosio for joining us today and for their work and commitment on this issue as well.  And most of all, I want to thank Christina Dibble and all of the other Sears associates here today who have served our country as veterans or as military spouses.  (Applause.) 
 
As Jill mentioned, for the past two years, we have traveled across America and in other parts of the world, meeting with our men and women in uniform, our veterans, and their families.  So we know all about your courage and your patriotism.  We have seen it firsthand.
 
We know about the sacrifices that you have made for our country.  And we know about the challenges that you face every single day.
 
And we’ve met so many military spouses who do so much, who work one fulltime job during the day and then they come home to start that second fulltime job of running a household and raising kids, and doing it all alone while a spouse is deployed.  We see them trying to build seniority at their jobs, but seeing that they have to keep starting over every time that they move to a new duty station.  And with each new move comes a whole new job search.  And that’s not easy, particularly when so many employers see a resume with multiple jobs as a red flag rather than as a reality of military life.
 
The truth is that many employers today simply aren’t aware of all that our veterans and military spouses have to offer.  They don’t realize that members of our military do some amazing things.  They master some of the most advanced technologies.  They run some of the most complex operations.  They have extensive experience managing hundreds of their colleagues.
 
And as for their spouses, as Christina said, on average, they have higher high school graduation rates than the general population.  And more than 80 percent of spouses have some college education as well.
 
And then, there are all the skills and experiences that come with being a military spouse and managing that lifestyle, qualifications that you won’t necessarily learn at school or at a university -- the ability to work well with all kinds of people all over the place; the ability to multitask, because you cannot do this if you cannot multitask and think outside of the box; the ability to weather adversity and adapt to changing circumstances.
 
See, Jill and I can tell, from first-hand experience, that our veterans and military spouses are some of the hardest-working, most talented people that we know.  And we think that it’s time that our country finally tapped into their full potential and took advantage of all these folks have to offer.
 
And that’s really why, this week, we’ve launched this wonderful, new campaign that we’re calling, “Joining Forces.”  So this is a nationwide effort to bring Americans together to recognize, to honor, and to serve our nation’s military families.
 
So we’re joining forces with everyone, with organizations like the PTA and the YMCA.  We’re urging them to reach out to our military kids and do more to support them. 
 
We’re joining forces with cities and states, and we’re encouraging them to adopt policies that help military families. 
 
We’re joining forces with the American people, more importantly, as neighbors and colleagues and classmates and community members, we’re urging people to step up and give something back to the military families who’ve given all of us so much.
 
And we’re joining forces with businesses all across the country.  We’re calling on them to recruit and hire veterans and military spouses.  We’re calling on them to make their workplaces more military-spouse friendly and more Guard and Reserve-family friendly, with things like flexible work schedules and portable jobs.
 
As Lou explained earlier, Sears has already stepped up to answer this call in such a brilliant way.  And they’re not alone.  Siemens is setting aside 10 percent of their open positions for veterans.  Technology leaders like AOL, Indeed.com and Cisco are creating new tools to connect military spouses and veterans with employers that are hiring.  Companies like Walmart and HP and Microsoft made a pledge to train military spouses in new technologies, so that they can start their own businesses.
 
As Secretary Solis said, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce is encouraging its millions of members to hire military spouses and veterans, to find more mentors for military wives and women veterans.  And the Chamber is also going to host more than 100 job fairs across the country for these individuals.
 
And in the coming months, Jill and I, we’re going to be highlighting the best programs and initiatives that we can find at companies all across America.  This is a challenge.  Sears has set the bar.  Look at what we can do.  Can you do more?  And we’ll be calling on all companies, all companies in this country -- large and small -- to follow in their footsteps.  We’ll be urging companies to study these best practices and consider how they can incorporate them into their workplaces.  We’ll be urging them to get creative and come up with new ideas to help us benefit from all that our military spouses and veterans have to offer.
And I want to be clear that we’re not just doing this because it’s the right thing to do for America’s veterans and military families, although it is.  This is about doing the right thing.  But we’re also doing it because it’s the right thing to do for America’s businesses; because we know that when our companies hire the best people and then give them what they need to succeed, they see the results in their bottom lines.
 
And if enough companies do that -- if we can get enough companies to give our veterans and military spouses the chances they deserve to put their skills to work, that won’t just be good for those companies.  This is something that’s going to be good for our entire economy and for the future of this country.
 
So I want to end today by thanking all of you at Sears for everything you’ve done, for setting that bar, for showing other companies in the rest of the country what it means to have a workplace that values the service that you provide.  And I want to thank you for everything that you will continue to do in the months and the years ahead.  And we look forward to seeing companies across the country follow your lead.
 
So thank you so much.  Thank you for this event.  Thank you to all of you for your service.  May God bless.  Take care.
 
END
5:00 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 14, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at National Math and Science Bowl
Fountain-Fort Carson High School
Colorado Springs, Colorado
9:47 A.M. MDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Hello.  I’m so incredibly pleased to be back at Fort Carson.  And as a teacher, I feel right at home in this school.
 
The First Lady and I wanted to visit your school today because we know how important the role is that school plays in the lives of military children.  As a teacher and a military mom, I know what a difference a great teacher can make and what a world-class education means for our nation’s military children.
 
In our travels, Michelle and I have seen many teachers who are making things easier and better for these military children in their classrooms -- teachers who arrange parent-teacher conferences by Skype so deployed parents can participate; teachers who encourage students to tape a photo of their deployed parent on their desk so they can look at it whenever they feel the need; or teachers like the one in my granddaughter’s classroom who hung a photo of my son’s deployed unit so the whole class would know that Natalie’s dad was at war.
 
Believe me, that photo of her dad on the wall meant the world to Natalie.  And it meant the world to me and the Vice President, too.
 
These teachers and all other individuals and groups across the country who are supporting our troops and their families are showing all Americans that there are countless ways to help -- some large and some small, but all important.
 
And I can tell you from personal experience, all appreciate it.  We can all join forces.
That's why I’m so excited to be back here today to share what Michelle and I have been working on and to be part of this math and science competition.
 
With that, I'd like to introduce my friend and our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Hey!  Wow!  (Applause.)  Good morning!  Now, this is how you wake up.  This is good.  You all rest yourselves, rest yourselves.  (Cheering.) 
 
STUDENT:  I love you!
 
MRS. OBAMA:  I love you, guys, too.
 
First, I want to thank -- let’s give Jill Biden, Dr. Jill Biden, a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  My fabulous partner in this effort, she is a terrific partner, and I’m grateful to have her.
 
I also want to recognize and thank Bernard, as well as Superintendent Serrano, as well as recognize Lieutenant Governor Joe Garcia and Fountain mayor Jeri Howells, as well.  Let’s give them a round of applause, because they’re all here.  (Applause.)
 
And most importantly, I want to thank all the students from Fountain-Fort Carson High School, and especially to all of the members of military families that we have here today, the parents and students who are such an important part of this community and important part of this country.
 
You all are really the reasons why Jill and I are traveling around the country over these last couple of days, because right now we’re kicking off a campaign called Joining Forces.  This is a nationwide campaign to recognize, and honor, and support our military families.  (Cheering.)  Yeah, that's a good thing.  (Applause.)
 
See, the truth is you all inspire us, and we really wanted to do something to give back.  So we’ve asked all types of people all around the country and organizations to get involved in Joining Forces because Jill and I know that everyone can do something.
 
We’re Joining Forces with American people all across the country -- our neighbors, and colleagues, and community members -- folks who are stepping up to give something back to the military families that have given us all so much.
 
We’re Joining Forces with companies like Wal-Mart and Sears, who have promised us that if a military spouse who works at their stores has to move to a new duty station, they’ll do their best to have a job waiting for those spouses at their new post.
 
And we’re Joining Forces with schools and organizations like the PTA and the YMCA, who said that they’re going to reach out and do more for our military kids.
 
For example, the National Math and Science Initiative that you’ve heard about is working with the Department of Defense and partners in the private sector to expand a program that they’ve called the Initiative for Military Families.  Now, this program provides Advanced Placement courses, as you’ve heard, in math and science to schools and areas with high military populations. 
 
And that’s really why Jill and I wanted to be here today.  That's why we picked this school, we picked this community.  We’re thrilled about this effort and we’re thrilled about how it’s going to affect students like you.
 
But we’re even more excited that this initiative is going to be opening up to a total of 28 new schools, including right here at Fort-Fountain -- at Fountain-Fort Carson.  And that's why we’re here today.
 
And this means that thousands of additional students just like all of you are going to get access to AP courses.  And this is important because in addition to stretching your minds, it’s going to make you more competitive for college admissions.  All these colleges are looking for kids who are doing AP courses.  This is going to give you a leg up.  And it’s going to open up greater opportunities for you for the rest of your lives.
 
And this isn’t just about the classes that you’ll be taking in the next few years.  This is really about the opportunities that you’re going to have for years to come.  This is about your future.  It’s about the people that you’re going to become.  It’s about the impact that you’re going to make in this country, perhaps in the world. 
 
See, the truth is, as Bernard has said, math and science skills are important.  And the ones that you’re going to learn through these AP courses are going to open up a whole new world for all of you.  Maybe they’ll get you to medical school, because you need those types of courses to be competitive.  Maybe they’ll get you work at a software company.  Those companies are hiring so much and they’re looking for the top students in the areas of math or science. 
 
Or maybe it’ll get you in space, just like Bernard, or even to become one of the top CEOs in one of the most powerful companies in the country, because most of the CEOs of S&P 500 companies don't get their degrees in business or economics.  They really are usually getting their educations in engineering.  And I didn’t even realize that.  I thought that all CEOs were business and law majors, I thought, because I was a lawyer, you know.  But it’s really engineering.  It’s the math and the sciences. 
 
And an education in math and science can put you on the path to success in almost any field that you can imagine.  It helps you to see things differently and it gives you a special set of skills to go out and to tackle the world.
 
And there's something that I’ve learned in working and learning from and hearing from military families, and it’s that growing up in a military family also gives you a special set of skills.  I’ve learned that from the young people that I’ve met again and again.  When we talked to students like many of you, I’ve seen how having a parent in the military gives you all a unique perspective. 
 
And I’m just curious -- I want to see by a show of hands how many students here have parents who have served in the military.  I just want to see.  Just look at that.  (Applause.)  Just look at that.  (Applause.)
 
So I know that you all have some idea of what I’m talking about, because you all are the ones filling in for your moms and dads when they’re deployed, right?  You’re the ones who are taking on those extra household chores, stepping up at home.  You’re the ones making sure that your little brothers and sisters stay in line.  I know that's true, right?
 
You’re dealing with those moves every few years.  How many of you have had to move several times in your high school careers?  How many of you?  And having to adjust to that fourth or five or sixth new school? 
 
And I know that that's not always easy.  That can’t be easy.  And that wasn’t my life.  I was one of those kids who lived in the same city, went to the same high school, and I can only imagine how difficult it must be for kids who have to move and readjust every couple of years.  So I know it’s not been easy for you all. 
 
But one of the things I want to say is that on those tough days -- and I know they come around every now and then, those tough days when you feel like you don't want to roll out of bed, right?  Yeah, I see some heads nodding.  I know those days.  We have those days, too, every now and then.  I think the President does, too.  I got to push him out of bed.  It’s like, “Get up!”  (Laughter.)  We all have those days.
 
But when you feel that, and you don't want to take that extra effort, you think about skipping school, I just hope that you realize just how special your circumstances are.  I want you to realize that you all are really living an Advanced Placement kind of life.  You’re living it.  You’re learning what responsibility really means.  Right now, all of this that you’re going through is teaching you responsibility. 
 
And you’re learning how to be flexible.  And flexibility is key to just surviving as adults.  You’re learning how to be resourceful.  And more important, you’re learning how to be resilient, and that's 80 percent of the battle, and I think a lot of adults here will agree, right, a little flexibility and resilience will take you a long way.
 
So those are your specific skill sets that you’re learning.  And when you use that knowledge alongside with what you’ll be learning in these math and science courses and other classes, there’s no telling what you guys will be able to do and what you’ll be able to achieve.
 
So I want you all to be proud of who you are.  I want all of you young people from military families to know just how unique you are, how unique your experiences are, and take that with you, and know that you can conquer anything.  If you can do this, you can definitely go to college, right?  You can definitely succeed in college.  Come on, let me hear this.  Right?  (Applause.)
 
If you can do this, you can go on to be a lawyer, a doctor, a teacher.  You can do anything you want.  If you can get through this, you can do anything. 
 
And just know that this whole country is behind you.  That's what Joining Forces is all about -- making sure that you know that from the President of the United States on down, we’re behind you.  And in the months and years ahead, we want you to show us what you’ve got, right?  You’ve got to show us your stuff.  Can you do that?  (Applause.)  I think you can.  (Applause.)
 
We’re proud of you.  And actually, I think we’re going to get a chance to see some stuff showing right now.  I understand that we’ve got a little competition coming up.  Is that right? 
 
We’ve got the students versus the parents!  Oh, I know, parents are groaning there.  It’s, like, are you smarter than a fifth-grader?  (Laughter.)  I know sometimes I’m not.  (Laughter.) 
 
But each team will have one Mythbuster, Jamie and Grant, to a team.  So I don't want anyone blaming it on your Mythbuster, all right?  I’m talking to the parents.  (Laughter.)  If you lose, don't blame the Mythbusters.
 
So Jill and I are going to sit down.  We’re going to be asking the questions.  So we’re excited.  So now it’s time for us to meet our contestants and get this started. 
 
Thank you all so much.  Keep doing what you’re doing.  (Applause.)
 
END
10:02 A.M. MDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 13, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Joining Forces with the Colorado Rockies event
Coors Field
Denver, Colorado
8:23 P.M. MDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Hi.  The kids are probably saying, “Who?”  (Laughter.)  Anyways -- well, nice to see you.  It’s nice to be here. I’m Jill Biden.  I’m a proud military mom.  Our son is Delaware Army National Guard, so -- (cheering) -- thank you.  So I want to say a special hello to all the National Guard families who are here tonight.  And one of the things that Michelle and I are doing is we’re going out across the United States, and we’re trying to send out a message of how important military families are, and we want to get the word out to all Americans about the sacrifices that you make for all of us. 
 
And so thank you for your service.  Thank you for what you do for us.  We all really appreciate it.
 
And I'd like to introduce my partner in this project in Joining Forces, and it’s your First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Yeah, I’m a little taller.  It’s okay.  (Laughter.)
 
Are you guys having fun? 
 
CHILDREN:  Yeah!
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Isn’t this pretty cool?
 
CHILDREN:  Yeah!
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Did you guys get a chance to run out on the baseball field before it started raining?
 
CHILDREN:  Yeah!
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Great!  We are excited to be here.  This has been a big day for Jill and myself because yesterday we launched this huge national initiative.  We’re calling it Joining Forces, as Jill mentioned.  We’re rallying the country to make sure they’re aware of your stories, you guys’ stories, because you know you are heroes just like your parents are?  Do you realize that?  Because you all are sacrificing.  Your lives have been turned upside down, but you guys are doing it with grace, and we’re so, so very proud of you.  And America needs to know that and we need to rally everyone around you.
 
So we made that announcement yesterday.  And today we’ve been all over the country.  Just today do you know how many cities we’ve been to in just one day?  We were in North Carolina, then we flew to San Antonio, and now we’re here!  And tomorrow we’re going to Ohio.  We’re all over the place because we’re trying to spread the word.
 
And I’m just grateful to the Colorado Rockies for supporting this Major League Baseball, to Jessica Simpson.  Isn't she terrific?  (Applause.)  She’s amazing!  She flew all the way here just to be with you because she knows how important you and your families are.  We’re just so grateful.
 
So we’re going to keep doing this.  And we’re going to need your help.  When you guys need help in school, you need to speak up, let your teachers know if there's something going on.  We need you to talk to your parents.  We’re going to be gathering around to make sure you’re getting everything you need, okay?
 
So now we’re going to have some fun.  We’re going to have some more fun.  We want to see what you’ve been learning.  We want to see you run some bases, do some great stuff.  Are you ready?
 
CHILDREN:  Yes!
 
MRS. OBAMA:  All right, well, let’s get it going!  Let’s go!  (Cheering.)  Show me what we’re going to do.  Where are we going next?  We’re going in here!  Are we going out there?  All right, we’re going all over.  Let’s do it.  (Applause.)
 
END
8:26 P.M. MDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 13, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden in Press Availability
Warrior and Family Support Center
San Antonio, Texas
5:00 P.M. CDT
DR. BIDEN:  I wanted to thank Judy for taking us around today and showing us this beautiful family center.  And it was an honor for us to meet the families here at the center.  And up on the ward, we met several soldiers and their families. 
And actually you might think, oh, gosh, you’re going to a hospital and you’re going to see Wounded Warriors.  But actually, I think we leave here more inspired, because of the resilience and strength we see in our Wounded Warriors and their families. 
MRS. OBAMA:  And the thing that is amazing and one of the reasons why we wanted to come to this facility is because, as Judy explained, all of this that you see around is donated by the community -- 100 percent of every salary of every brick of every piece of wood, of every bit of food.  This is all done by the community.
And as you all know, Jill and I just launched “Joining Forces,” and we’re rallying the nation around our military families.  And a lot of people are going to wonder, well, how can I help?  What can I do?  This family center is an example of how communities step up and support the military families and the troops.  And they do it with their own dollars, with their own energy.
Judy said she has 67 volunteers waiting to volunteer at any given time.  We’ve seen university students here.  We’ve seen wives and mothers and sisters and brothers here helping.  And I talked to one young man, who -- I told him he should do the press avail.  (Laughter.)  He was saying that even as a soldier, he didn’t know that these resources existed.  And that’s what we want the nation to know.
This is the kind of stepping up that we can do, because most people will step up if they know the need is there.  And San Antonio is an example of that.  And there are hundreds of communities like this all across the nation.  We want to see thousands of communities like this, because not every family -- military family is going to live near a base.  They’re not going to live near this resource, but they need to have the same type of resource where they live.
And this is the kind of thing that individuals and businesses and nonprofits working together can create.  So this is our task.  We want to travel the nation, showing and lifting up and shining a light on models like these to give people around the country the inspiration and the ideas they need.  We’re encouraging people, if they want to find out how to get engaged and work with a military family, to go to joiningforces.gov, our website. 
We’re going to have this center; we’re going to have other resources linked there, where people can go and find out how they can help.  We’re going to encourage families here to share their ideas, go on that site, so that other people who don’t know what to do can get some ideas about help.
We are grateful to you -- Mom, they call her.  (Laughter.)  We would like -- I was asked by the commander here, do not steal her.  (Laughter.)  I’m not going to steal her, because we need you here.  We just need to replicate you --
MS. MARKELEZ:  Thank you very much.
MRS. OBAMA:  -- and scatter you around the nation. 
MS. MARKELEZ:  This building is thousands and thousands of people.  Mr. Steve Huffman is the builder, ma’am.  And he is the man who raised the money, along with a large group of people.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, thank you so much.  We’ve got a long list of things -- we’re to two more cities?  Yes, so we’re not done yet.  (Laughter.)  I’m not done yet.  So we hope you all and the media here, you keep shining a light.
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you for being here.
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you so much.  (Applause.)
END
5:04 P.M. CDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 13, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden during Operation Shower Drop By
Camp Lejeune, North Carolina
10:51 A.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Hello.  I’m Jill Biden, and -- gosh, thanks for inviting us here today.  We’re so excited.  And thank you to Martha Stewart. Gosh, she’s done a great job.  (Applause.)  And thank you to the ladies who are in charge of Operation Shower.  They’ve done a great job.
I’ve been involved -- Michelle and I have our new Joining Forces that we’re traveling around the country.  And this is so exciting for us because this is exactly what we hope that other communities will do for military families.  And actually in the state of Delaware where I’m from, we actually did a shower for a military family -- not with Martha Stewart, of course -- (laughter) -- but anyway, it’s just so great to be here.
I am a mom.  I have three children.  I have five grandchildren, starting from 17 down to age five.  So congratulations to all you moms-to-be. 
And now I'd like to introduce one of my favorite moms, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 
MRS. OBAMA:  Wow.  So are you all having fun?  Is this fun?  Have you gotten into the fun part of it?
So how many of you are first-time moms?  Oh, so most of you are.  That's very -- you know, just thinking back on -- you know, my youngest is nine, will be 10.  I enjoyed my pregnancy.  I enjoyed every minute of it.  And I hope you all are enjoying every minute of it.
And I know that it helps to know that you’ve got some support.  I mean, as a new mom, there are just an array of things that run through your head:  What's this kid going to be like?  Will I get my shape back?  Will I ever sleep again?  What's a onesie? How does it work?
And it’s nice to have a supportive community around you, especially new moms; to have other moms who have been there, because we all get through it.  They don't break.  (Laughter.)  I’ve come to know that babies are really resilient.  But it always helps to have a community around you.
And this event, Operation Shower, is one of the ways that communities can really gather around new moms, or even second- and third-time moms who are expecting.  I mean, what we want to tell the country is, you know, imagine that you’re a new mom and your husband is deployed, and maybe you’re alone because you’re in a new community, and you’re not near your own mom, or your sisters, or that support group.  I mean, just imagine all the anxiety that comes with pregnancy -- and many of you may be newly married, or new relationships.  Who knows?  It’s all kinds of things.
And that's one of the things that most Americans don't realize, is that you guys have to do this alone sometimes, and you’re doing it not knowing whether your spouse is okay, or will be okay, which adds to the stress.  It adds to the pressure.
So it’s events like these that gets you to shake it off and forget all that worrisome stuff.  And it reminds you that you’re not alone; that there's a whole community. 
And through Joining Forces we hope there will be a whole country that will be around you just not during this time when you’re expecting but in the years to come when you’re worrying about where to put your child in school, and how do you handle that third transfer, and what do you do about college, how can you afford college, and how are you going to get your own education.
That's what Joining Forces is all about.  It’s asking every sector of this society to step up and support you all, because you all are serving in your own way.  And the children that will be born will be serving, too.  They’re serving right now this country, because if they’re born healthy and happy, their dads who are deployed are going to be able to focus on their mission and do a better job, because they know their families are safe.
So we want to ask the rest of the nation to look at this.  This is a fun way to give back.  And we did this at the White House.  We brought you guys White House onesies and blankets.  We took up a drive.  We had boxes all over the West Wing and the East Wing.  People wrote checks.  We brought -- I mean, this was fun.  And any business, any community, any school can do this for a military family, for an expectant mom.  All you have to do is find them.  And all you all have to do is ask and reach out.
And we’re going to be making it easier for people around the country to connect.  We’ve got a new website, joiningforces.gov, where people can get online, find out what's going on in their own communities, learn more about Operation Shower and how to get involved, and how to do something like this in their own communities.
So I want to thank you, ladies, for holding it together, because you all look great.  You all look pretty doggone good.  And we’re just so proud of you all.  Proud of you all, proud of you for holding it together while your man is doing something hard.  (Laughter.)  And there's nothing like having a man that's doing something hard, right, Jill?  (Laughter.)  Sheesh.  (Laughter and applause.)
So with that, we’re going to have each of you come up so we can meet you, take a picture, if you’d like.  And then we’ll do a big group shot.  So we’ll have a class picture.  (Laughter.)
So thank you all.  We’re proud of you.  Thanks so much.
END
10:56 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 13, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden to Base Community
Goettge Memorial Field House
Camp Lejeune, North Carolina
10:02 A.M. EDT
 
DR. BIDEN:  Good morning.  I’m Jill Biden and I am a proud military mom.  I’m delighted to be back here at Camp Lejeune, and I’m especially fortunate to be here today with General Dunford and Bonnie Amos, wife of the Commandant of the Marine Corps.
 
Looking out at this crowd of Marines and their amazing families, one word comes to mind:  Oo-rah!
 
AUDIENCE:  Oo-rah!
 
DR. BIDEN:  I love that.  (Laughter.) 
    
When I visited two years ago, I was struck by what an amazing community you have here.  I’ve had the honor of spending precious time with some of the Marines and family members of the 2nd Combat Engineer Battalion who were about to deploy to Afghanistan. 
 
I shared their pride, their concern and even their tears.  And as always, it was the mothers who sought me out.  They knew that I understood the powerful mix of emotions they were feeling at that moment.
 
As I greeted the mother of a young Marine, she gave me a tight hug.  I encouraged her to hang in there, hang in there.  And in that strong way only a Blue Star mom could, she said something to me I'll never forget.  She said, “Every day.  Every day.”
 
I understood exactly what she meant because my son, Beau, has been a member of the Delaware Army National Guard for the last 10 years.  In 2009, he served a year in Iraq.  I’m very proud of him, but I also know how tough it can be when a family member is in a war zone thousands of miles away.  I know how much you worry.  I know how much you pray. 
 
So to each of you and to your families, please accept our heartfelt thanks for your service to our nation. 
 
While I was here, I also had the privilege of visiting the Wounded Warrior Battalion where I met injured Marines whose overriding concern was when they could return to their units.  And while we can never repay these brave soldiers for their sacrifice, we can and must always make sure that we never forget them.
 
And I visited some dedicated students at Coastal Community College just down the road -- students like Julia Frost who in addition to being a former active duty Marine and a wife of a current Marine, was taking courses to become a teacher.
 
Every person I met demonstrated that you are real heroes, servicemembers and families alike, from the moms and dads who keep your families together while your loved ones are serving overseas, to the grandparents who step in with much needed support, to the children who are so strong and brave while their mom or dad is away from home.  
 
You go about your business every day, lifting up your communities, volunteering at your schools, lending a hand to your neighbors.  And you do it all while carrying a heavier burden than most folks can imagine.  You are truly remarkable.
 
And you are not doing it alone.  The people in the surrounding Lejeune community who are supporting our troops and their families are showing all Americans that there are countless ways to help -- some large and many small, but all are important.
 
And I can tell you, from personal experience, all appreciate it.  We can all join forces. 
 
That's why the First Lady and I are here today, because we need all Americans to support our military families the way you do it here. 
 
With that, I'd like to introduce my dear friend, my Joining Forces partner, and our amazing First Lady of the United States of America, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you all.  Thanks so much.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  And thank you, Jill.  I am so grateful to have such a magnificent friend and partner in Jill.  She’s just been amazing in so many ways.  And I am grateful, grateful.
 
I also want to recognize General Dunford; Major General Jensen; Mrs. Bonnie Amos, the wife of the Commandant of the Marine Corps; Mrs. Liz Kent, the wife of the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  I also want to recognize Senator Kay Hagan who is here with us today.  Please, Kay, stand, because she flew all the way back here from Washington to be here.  (Applause.)  And I am so grateful to Kay for all her support.  And of course North Carolina’s First Gentleman Bob Eaves, as well, thank you so much for taking the time to be here.  (Applause.)  And thank you for your work on behalf of the military and their families.
 
And of course, I want to thank all of you -- all of you -- here at Camp Lejeune. 
 
Now, the stories like the ones that Jill told are exactly why we’re here today.  We can’t tell you how much it has meant to us to have the chance to meet all of you, to hear your stories, and quite frankly to steal a few hugs from your kids, because they’re all so cute!  It’s usually the best part of the visit. 
 
All of you -– the Marines, the Sailors, the spouses, the children, the grandparents and everyone else out there –- you all are incredible.  You all are incredible.  Your strength and spirit inspire me every single day.  And I mean that.  And I’m so thankful that I’ve had the opportunity to learn from so many of you over the past few years.
 
No matter whether it’s been meeting with soldiers and families at Fort Bragg or other military bases, or sitting down at policy meetings with your commanders, or seeing the courage of our wounded warriors in hospitals all over this great nation, or feeling the strength of the families of one of our fallen heroes, you all have opened your arms, you’ve opened your hearts.  You’ve shown me what being in a military family is all about. 
 
And I know that every single member of a military family is serving this country, whether you’re wearing fatigues or whether you’re wearing hospital scrubs or a business suit or an elementary school uniform. 
 
For all of you out there who might be spouses or moms or dads, I know that you’re doing it all.  I know that you’re cooking breakfast before dawn.  I know that you’re shuffling the kids off to school and heading off to work for a full day yourself. 
 
I know that you’re trying to balance your own career.  Many of you are hitting the books, trying to complete your own degrees at the same time. 
 
I know that you’re getting your kids off to their Little League teams, helping them with their school projects, hosting birthday parties.
 
And while all of this is enough to fill any family’s plate, yours is also full of so much more.  It includes everything that comes with having a family member in the military.  And America needs to know. 
 
With each move, you know that means yet another school for your kids.  You know it means another new job for yourselves.
 
With each deployment, you run your household by yourself and you watch as your kids grow up just a little bit faster because mom or dad is away. 
 
And night after night, you pray, you pray that the next newscast or the next knock on the door will bring only good news.
 
And you do it all with such dignity, with such grace that most Americans don’t even realize what you’re going through. 
 
Military families are so good at keeping everything together that it’s almost like you’re wearing camouflage, even though you’re not the ones on the battlefield.  People can’t always see your special brand of service because you don’t wear it on your sleeve. 
 
Take Tanya Queiro, for instance, from right here at Camp Lejeune.  A Marine for 12 years herself, Tanya is married to another Marine who’s still on active duty.  Together, they have three kids between the ages of 10 and 14.  And she’s pursuing a doctorate in organizational psychology.  She works full-time as a human resource specialist, while also volunteering as a mentor to other military spouses.  And she’s done it all through at least eight of her husband’s deployments, which last more than six months at a time.
 
But even with all these achievements and contributions, do you know what Tanya says?  And these are her words.  She says, “I don’t think I’m a super-woman and I don’t think I really do anything extra-ordinary.”
 
And that’s just it.  That's just it.  Your ordinary is extraordinary.  Your ordinary is extraordinary for anyone.
 
And that’s why Jill and I are here today.  We want everyone in this country to know just how extraordinary military families are.
 
And that’s why we’ve launched the Joining Forces campaign.  Now, this is a nationwide effort to bring Americans together to recognize, honor and serve our nation’s military families.  And we’re going to focus on the things that military families like yours have told us that you care about most; things like employment and education and wellness and mental health.  These are the issues military spouses brought up as we’ve been traveling around the country.  They’re the concerns we’ve heard from troops who just want to make sure their families are taken care of when they’re deployed. 
 
And so we’ve put out a call; a call to action to every sector of our society so that everyone mobilizes to do what we can to make a real commitment to support military families like yours.
 
And our motto is simple:  Everyone can do something.  Everyone can do something.  Everyone can ask themselves, “What can I do to give back to these families that have given our country so much?”
 
And I am pleased that Americans of all kinds are already stepping up to answer that call.  And you all should know that.  People are excited to help.  They’re pumped up.
 
We’re joining forces across the federal government.  My husband directed his federal agency -- all of them; not just the Departments of Defense and the VA, but all of them, to identify ways that they could make life easier for all of you.  And in January, they came back with nearly 50 commitments –- everything from improving access to mental health care and childcare, to helping spouses and veterans find jobs.
 
We’re joining forces with businesses and non-profit organizations across the country.  Companies like Sears, and Kmart and Sam’s Club, they’ve promised us that if a military spouse who works at their stores has to move to a new duty station, they’ll do their best to have a job waiting for those spouses.
 
Siemens told us that they’ll set aside 10 percent of their open positions for veterans. 
 
The SCORE Foundation and partners like Wal-Mart, and Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft said that they’ll provide materials and services to 16,000 veterans and spouses to help them start successful small businesses. 
 
Reach Out and Read will distribute 400,000 books to military kids. 
 
The PTA and the Military Child Education Coalition have committed to help schools across the country better understand the unique challenges that military children face. 
 
And let me tell you, the list goes on and on and on.  And after today’s launch, we’ve gotten even more calls from more businesses and more non-profits across this country.
 
We’re joining forces with individuals and communities, so that each of us finds our own way to serve the military families who are our neighbors and our co-workers and our classmates, because mostly, this is about joining forces with you.  We want to make sure that these commitments make a real difference in your lives. 
 
And this isn’t going to be a one-way street, because we really need to hear back from you so that we can keep finding ways to work together and lighten the load for our military families.  We need to hear from you.  This doesn’t matter if it’s not hitting you where you live.  So we’re going to need to know.
 
And that’s something that all of you here in Jacksonville know a whole lot about, stepping up in a community, because the military and civilian communities here have been joining forces for decades.  We’re here because this is a model of what can happen.
 
I’ve heard about how the Beirut Memorial outside of town was built.  I’ve heard about how, in the face of a tragedy, the citizens and businesses of Jacksonville came together to raise funds and gather donations in order to honor our fallen heroes and their families.
 
And in the decades since that time, this community’s commitment has never wavered.  That's what I’ve been told.
 
To this day, this community is holding fish fries and selling hot dogs out of backs of trucks to raise money for military causes.  I hear that the local businesses here give donations to military families in need.  The car dealerships sponsor scholarships for kids of Marines.  I know that the YMCA here has worked with your schools on programming to help children adjust to the transitions of military life.
 
And I know that your own young people are getting involved in very special ways, like 17-year-old Margaret Rochon, who was honored as one of the nation’s military children of the year just last week.  I got to meet her.  Very special young woman.
 
Margaret single-handedly convinced six nationally recognized experts to come lead a seminar for some of your schoolteachers about the effects of PTSD on military families.  This young girl did this.  Now it’s part of the formal annual training for teachers in Onslow County, I’m told.  And she did it all while volunteering more than 500 hours right here in this community.  That's what Margaret did.  And she’s a kid.
 
So, all these stories -- and there are so many more -- all these stories are beautiful.  They’re inspiring.  And they show something very important.  They show the rest of the nation that you don’t have to be the First Lady of the United States, you don't have to be a CEO, you don't have to be a General to get involved in this effort. 
 
And that’s exactly what we want to accomplish with Joining Forces.  Our goal is for every community in America to feel like this one feels.  This is the model -- for every school to understand the challenges of being a military child.  We want every business to do something, to do anything, to show their support; for community groups, and faith communities, and individuals to take every step they can so that military families know that they never have to go it alone.
 
And we want to make sure that these commitments last, no matter who the President is, who controls Congress, no matter if we’re in a time of war or in a time of peace, because the truth is, showing our gratitude to those who serve this nation, whether they’re on the battlefield or right here at home, is something that every single one of us, as an American, can and should get behind. 
 
This is something that we all can believe in –- as neighbors, as community members, but most importantly, as Americans.
 
So I truly hope that this initiative makes a real impact in your lives.  I really hope it does.  And I hope that this is worthy of the strength and the service and the commitment that your families demonstrate every single day.  That is our hope.
 
And so to all of you here, I just want to say thank you.  Thank you for setting that example for the rest of us.  And thank you for being so extraordinary. 
 
May God bless you all, and may God bless the United States of America.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
 
END
10:23 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 April 12, 2011
Remarks by the President, the Vice President, the First Lady, and Dr. Biden at Launch of "Joining Forces" Initiative
East Room
12:16 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Well, welcome to the White House.  Shirley, you’re getting to be an old pro.  (Laughter.)  When Shirley and Jill made their first television appearance a while ago, I think it was up in Philly at -- for a Boots on the Ground event, Mr. Secretary, they were both scared to death.  Now I am scared to follow Jill.  (Laughter.)
    
Ladies and gentlemen, Jill and I just returned from a ceremony that honored Bob Dole and his heroic service -- an unparalleled devotion to supporting veterans in this country.
You know, he always knew and taught me what many of us have come to learn -- that we have many obligations in this country, but we only have one truly -- one truly sacred obligation, and that is to prepare those who we send to war with all that they need, and take care of those who return from war and their families with all they deserve.
Although Bob’s generation was known as “The Greatest Generation,” this generation of warriors, as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Admiral Mullen can tell you, this generation of warriors may be among the most devoted because of the long, long, long periods of service that they’ve had to endure.
They’ve seen multiple deployments.  They’ve seen and participated in two wars that -- wars that have extended almost a decade.  And in the process, we have lost over 5,000 -- not over, exactly, as of an hour ago -- 5,957 fallen angels; 43,006 -- 43,006 have been wounded.  And there’s still more of a job to be done.  There are still more warriors deployed.
I don’t think there’s ever been a time in American history when a generation of military families has had to endure for as long and as much as this generation of American families of service people.
As I said, we only have one truly sacred obligation.  You know, the poet John Milton said of Shirley and all the Blue Star moms and dads and husbands and wives and grandparents out there, he said, “They also serve who only stand in wait.”  And this generation of military families has, as I said earlier, stood a long time.  Some have waited multiple times.
I look at the men in uniform here, the men I most admire, and I may be mistaken, but I don’t think there’s been this many times when people have been in battle, wounded, seen bloody, bloody conflict, come home for a brief respite, and sent back again.  It’s one thing to go the first time, not knowing exactly what the horrors of war may be like, but to saddle up and go back again and again and again.
On my multiple flights, Mr. Secretary, into Iraq and Afghanistan over 25 times, I -- last time in I sat up with the pilots in the C-130s that were coming in.  And I said, guys, how many tours?  Of the four in the cockpit, only one had served only two.  Three had served -- two had served four, and this was the fifth deployment for the fourth.
So this generation that Michelle and Jill are embarking on bringing the awareness of the rest of the country to, we owe them a lot.  They’ve known the pain and anxiety that comes from when the external and internal bond of family is stretched across oceans and gulfs of time. 
You know, your child, it’s your child when you’re there; your child, you miss their first step; the first smile that they smile; the missed birthdays; the anniversaries that were celebrated on Skype.  We learned all about Skype when our son was in Iraq for a year.
    
Yet their support here at home has never wavered, and I would say that they, too, the families that Shirley represents and many of you in the audience, they are as brave and heroic as their sons and daughters and their husbands and wives that are there, and they truly deserve our support.
As I said, Jill and I know a little bit like -- what it’s like firsthand.  Our son Beau was in Iraq for a year, deployed once.  We learned at that time how much it means to those who are in a war zone thousands of miles away, knowing that their family is being cared for; that the next-door neighbor has offered to cut their grass while their husband is overseas; or that the next-door neighbor will give a jumpstart on that cold morning when you’re trying to get your daughter or son to elementary school.  I know that those little things are the things that make every day work or not work.  It matters.  It matters because it’s one less thing they have to worry about in theater. 
And all of those of you who’ve served in the military and served overseas, no, I’m not exaggerating when I say that -- every single warrior I meet in place in Afghanistan or Iraq or Bosnia, in those days, in Kosovo -- all they ask about, they ask about what it’s like at home:  Can you give my wife a call?  Can you pick up the phone and call my pop, let him know it’s okay?
All Americans should know that one act of kindness extended to a family of a soldier, a sailor, or a Marine, a Coast Guardsman, reverberates across water, over the mountains, and through the deserts, into the heart of the warrior who is standing there alone, thinking as much about his family as his family is thinking about him or her.
I promise you, I promise you, all those of you who are listening on the television or radio, it matters.  It matters. 
Jill always points out that only 1 percent of our nation is serving -- over a million young women and men -- and not so young.  Last time -- four or five times ago I was in Iraq in one of Saddam’s old palaces, and we were having one of those sort of impromptu meetings you have all the time, Mr. Secretary, where one soldier gathers around you, then five, and then 10.  Next thing you’re standing on a chair talking to a bunch.  And I said, “You’re a great bunch of young guys.”  And a guy from the back, General Shinseki, yells, “Biden” -- and I was senator -- “Senator, John Jones” -- I won’t mention his name -- “John Jones.  Saw you here last time.  Sixty-one years old.”  (Laughter.) 
So they’re not all -- they’re not all young.  But the fact is only 1 percent of the families have served in those wars.  Yet 100 percent of American families have an obligation to commit to that 1 percent and just show one -- one single act of kindness to a deployed veteran’s family.
As Jill has declared many times as Second Lady, helping to muster the strength and to remind the neighbors that everyone in America has a duty to fulfill that sacred obligation I mentioned.  Jill knows how important it is for our troops and for their families.  She knows also that -- how far just a little bit of support can go. 
My wife, whom I’m about to introduce, feels it in her bones.  It’s become part of who she is.  That blue star is sort of indelibly branded on her heart.  And it’s come in our family and among our friends, as Shirley will tell you, to define her in a sense. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I’m honored to present to you the Second Lady of the United States, a Blue Star mom, my wife, Jill Biden.  (Applause.) 
DR. BIDEN:  Good morning.  I’m Jill Biden, and I am a proud military mom.  As my husband said, we are honored to have you all here at the White House today as we express the gratitude of our entire nation to those who serve in our military and to their amazing families.  You are all heroes -- from the moms and dads who keep your families together while your loved ones are serving overseas, to the grandparents who step in with much needed support, to the children who are strong and brave while mom and dad are away.  You go about your business every day, lifting up your communities, volunteering at your schools, lending a hand to your neighbors, and you do it all while carrying a heavier burden than most folks imagine.  You are truly remarkable. 
As Joe said, we have been a National Guard family for the last 10 years.  Two and a half years ago, I stood in Dover, Delaware, watching as our son Beau prepared to deploy to Iraq.  I remember it like it was yesterday.  Like other military families I felt an intense mixture of pride and concern, and I can honestly say that not a day passed during his year away when I didn’t worry about his safety.
During the deployment ceremony a friend slipped a prayer into my hand.  It brought me comfort, and I’ve shared it with many others since then.  The prayer asks for courage and strength for each soldier to do their duty when they risk their lives to protect our freedom, and expresses thanks for the sacrifice of these men and women and their families.  That prayer has been a huge source of comfort to me, especially in the year that Beau was deployed.  I could be anywhere in the course of my day, writing on the chalkboard in my classroom or preparing a meal, and I would just stop, close my eyes, and say that quick prayer for him and all others serving in harm’s way.
Now, when I attend deployment ceremonies I pass on this prayer to the moms and families I meet in the hopes that it comforts them as it did me.  I’ve had the opportunity over the last few years to attend several of the deployment and return ceremonies.  I have seen the pride, the trepidation, the relief, and the pure joy.  I have spent time with spouses and children, grandparents and friends, but somehow it is always the mothers who seek me out.  They know that I understand their experience.  And I because I do, I offer them my thanks, my prayers, and a warm embrace.
Michelle and I have met so many amazing families in the past few years.  Just last month, I attended a deployment ceremony where I met some folks I now call the grandparents.  Both parents of three children under the age of 10 were deploying, and these grandparents decided to circle the wagons and take care of the children together.  The grandmothers Janice (ph) and Ellen are here today.  Grandpa Charles is home babysitting.  (Laughter.)  I want to thank your entire family for their service.
Now, just think about these women.  They aren’t wearing uniforms.  They don’t live on a base.  But they are serving.  They could be your neighbors.  Ryan, Emma and Abby (ph) -- their grandchildren -- could be in your child’s classroom.  They could be members of your church or synagogue or customers at the hardware store you manage.  Think about that.
Now, imagine how a community could rally around this family, helping with carpools, sporting events, or school activities.  I’ve seen through my work with Shirley’s organization that small community groups can make a huge difference.  Imagine for a moment not just what these small gestures mean to a family, but what they mean to a soldier thousands of miles of away who knows that someone is looking out for the ones he loves back home.
There are small and effective groups like this all over the country -- from the barbecue master, who travels all over the state of Ohio to cook for military families; to the accountants providing free tax service; to the soldiers in Minnesota collecting hockey equipment for military kids.  These efforts make a difference in the lives of our families.
When I was in Iraq last year, I heard a story that has stuck with me ever since.  An officer told me about a little girl in his daughter’s class who broke into tears when she heard the “Ave Maria” sung during a holiday program.  As the teacher comforted her, the little girl explained that the song had been played at her father’s funeral.  Her father had been killed in Iraq.
As a teacher, I know that all teachers would want to understand that little girl’s experience.  So I shared that story with a group of educators, and I am so pleased to share the good news today that the American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education has partnered with the Military Child Education Coalition to promote training for future teachers.  Together, they hope to teach 10,000 future educators how to best serve their military-connected students across the country.
In our travels, Michelle and I have seen many teachers who are making a real difference for the military children in their classrooms -- teachers who arrange parent-teacher conferences by Skype so deployed parents can participate; or teachers who encourage students to tape a photo of their deployed parent to their desk so they can look at it whenever they feel the need; or teachers like the one in my granddaughter’s classroom who hung up a photo of my son’s deployed unit so the whole class would know that Natalie’s dad was at war.
Believe me, that photo of her dad on the wall meant the world to Natalie, and it meant the world to me and Joe, too.
These teachers and all the other individuals and groups across the country who are supporting our troops and their families are showing all Americans that there are countless ways to help -- some large, and many small, but all important. 
And I can tell you from personal experience, all appreciate it.  We can all join forces. 
I am thrilled and humbled to be here today with a group of people that represents the best of this nation -- individuals and families who embody the strength, the resilience and the patriotism that has shaped the United States of America. 
We -- Joe, myself, Barack, and Michelle -- we are here today because of you.  We are here to celebrate you.  You are doing your part.  The government is doing its part.  And each American has the ability to make a difference in the life of a military family.
That’s what this initiative is all about.  Every one of us can commit to one small act of kindness. 
And now it’s my honor and privilege to introduce a man who is doing his part as a strong leader and constant advocate for our service members, veterans, and military families.  He’s also the husband of my partner on this effort -- our President and Commander-in-Chief, Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  Thank you, everybody.  Please, please have a seat.  Thank you very much.  Thank you very much.  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  Thank you, everyone.  Please, please be seated. 
Thank you very much.  Well, as you can see, the Vice President and I are the warm-up acts here today.  (Laughter.)  Our role is to introduce our better halves.  Actually, Michelle and Jill are like our better three-quarters or four-fifths.  They’re basically just all around better.  (Laughter.)
So, thank you, Jill, for your introduction and sharing your personal experiences and stories and being able to describe how much this means to you personally.  To the Vice President, the entire family, which, like so many others, has known both the pride but also the worries and the fears when a loved one in uniform is serving in harm’s way. 
We are joined today by members of Congress, by members of my Cabinet, Joint Chiefs, by leaders across the administration and just about every sector of American society.  But most of all, we’re joined by our service members and their families, representing the finest military that the world has ever known. 
And while the campaign that brings us all together is truly unique, it does reflect a spirit that’s familiar to all of us -- the spirit that has defined us as a people and as a nation for more than two centuries.
Freedom is not free -- simple words that we know are true.  For 234 years, our freedom has been paid by the service and sacrifice of those who’ve stepped forward, raised their hand and said, “Send me.”  They put on a uniform.  They swear an oath to protect and defend.  And they carry titles that have commanded the respect of generations -- soldiers, airmen, Marine, sailor, Coast Guardsman. 
Our nation endures because these men and women are willing to defend it, with their very lives.  And as a nation, it is our solemn duty and our moral obligation to serve these patriots as well as they serve us.
But we are here today because these Americans in uniform have never served alone -- not at Lexington, not at Concord, not in Iraq, not in Afghanistan.  Behind every American in uniform stands a wife, a husband, a mom, a dad, a son or a daughter, a sister or brother.  These families -— these remarkable families —- are the force behind the force.  They, too, are the reason we’ve got the finest military in the world.
Whenever I’m with our troops overseas, when I ask them what we can do for you, there’s one thing they request more than anything else:  “Take care of my family.”  Take care of my family.  Because when our troops are worried about their families back home, it’s harder for them to focus on the mission overseas.  The strength and the readiness of America’s military depends on the strength and readiness of our military families.  This is a matter of national security.  It’s not just the right thing to do; it also makes this country stronger.  
And that’s why, over the past two years, we’ve made major investments to take care of our military families.  Secretary Gates has been one of the leaders in this process -- new housing and childcare for families; new schools for military kids; better health care for veterans; new educational opportunities for hundreds of thousands of veterans and their family members under the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
And that’s why, as part of a landmark Presidential Study Directive, for the first time ever the well-being of our military families is now a national priority -— not just a Defense Department priority, not just a VA priority —- it is a federal government priority. 
Today, my administration is working to implement nearly 50 specific commitments to improve the lives of military families -—everything from protecting families from financial scams to improving education for military kids and spouses, to stepping up our fight to end homelessness among veterans.  And as Commander-in-Chief, I’m not going to be satisfied until we meet these commitments.  Across this administration, we’re going to keep doing everything in our power to give our military families the support and the respect that they deserve.
But as we’ve said all along, this can’t be the work of government alone.  Something else has been true throughout our history:  Our military —- and our military families —- can’t be the only ones bearing the burden of our security.  The United States of America is strongest -— and as Americans, we are at our best -— when we remember our obligations to each other.  When we remember that the price of freedom cannot simply be paid by a select few.  When we embrace our responsibilities to each other, especially those who serve and sacrifice in our name.
And that’s why the extraordinary work that Michelle and Jill have been engaged in these past two years is so important.  I remember how it began.  It was during our campaign.  Michelle was meeting with women all across the country, listening to their struggles, hearing their stories.  And inevitably there were complaints about husbands and -- (laughter) -- not doing enough around the house and -- (laughter) -- being confused when you’ve got to brush the daughter’s hair and get that ponytail right.  (Laughter.)  So they were sharing notes.  But in all these conversations, there was one group that just kept on capturing Michelle’s heart —- and that was military spouses. 
And she decided right then and there, if I was given an opportunity to serve as President and she was given the opportunity to serve as First Lady, she would be their voice.  And that’s exactly what she and Jill have done.
You all see the events around the country —- on the bases, in the communities, at the hospitals with our wounded warriors -— where Michelle and Jill celebrate our military families -- celebrate your families -— and what we can do to support you better.  But what you don’t see is what happens when the cameras are off; how Michelle and Jill come back, and they are inspired by what they saw, and they use their platform to advocate on your behalf in every single agency.
So I want every military family to know that Michelle hears you —- not just as a First Lady, not just as a fellow American —- but as a wife, and a daughter, and a mom.  She is standing up for you and your families -- not just today, in public events like this one, but every day.  And the voice that she promised to be, that’s what she’s been out there doing, making sure that you’re getting the support and appreciation that you and your families deserve.
And so it is my honor to introduce to you my extraordinary wife, America’s extraordinary First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you.  It is a thrill, and it’s always nice to be introduced by the President of the United States.  (Laughter.)  It’s always kind of cool.  And on behalf of all of us, I want to thank my husband, I want to thank Joe for their leadership.  From the top down, their personal commitment to keeping our military families strong is really what’s allowed us to be here. 
And I’ve told military families that.  This is something that comes from the very top.  This isn’t just about me and Jill.  We have husbands who care about your families, that care about these issues, and we wouldn’t be here today if it weren’t for their leadership.
So here we are.  This is the moment that we’ve been working toward for such a very long time.  And let me say that I am just thrilled that all of you could be here today as we launch this unprecedented national campaign to honor and support our incredible military families.  We’re calling it Joining Forces.  Pretty good.  (Laughter.) 
We call it Joining Forces for a very special reason.  This campaign is about all of us, all of us joining together, as Americans, to give back to the extraordinary military families who serve and sacrifice so much, every day, so that we can live in freedom and security.
Joining Forces is a challenge to every segment of American society to take action, to make a real commitment to supporting and engaging these families.  And I want to thank all of you here because this campaign is the result of everything that so many of you have shared with us and taught us over the past two years.
And I am especially grateful to my phenomenal partner in this effort, a Blue Star mom herself and a tireless champion of Guard and Reserve families, and an inspiration to me throughout this entire process, my dear friend, Dr. Jill Biden.  And we need to give Jill -- (applause.)
Joining Forces is inspired by the amazing military spouses and children who we’ve met all across the country, some of whom, like Shirley, have been able to join us today; families who’ve told us that even with the huge outpouring of support for our troops over the last decade, the truth is that as a country, we don’t always see their families, our heroes on the home front.  These families have appealed to us, like a military mom who wrote to me and said, “Please don’t let Americans forget or ignore what we live with.”  Please don’t let them forget.        
Joining Forces is shaped by the insights of spouses like Becky Gates and Patty Shinseki and Deborah Mullen and spouses of the Joint Chiefs, spouses of our Senior Enlisted Advisors and countless spouses of all ranks, many of whom I see sprinkled around have been terrific advisors to us.  Also, the passionate advocates representing military families who are here, and of course, member of Congress from both parties, they’re all in support of this.  These are all leaders who’ve devoted their lives to serving our troops and their families and who’ve helped us to understand where and how a campaign like this could really make a difference.
Joining Forces builds on the great work of the President and the Vice President and the entire administration, which has made military families a priority across the federal government, even as we recognize, as the President said, that this work cannot be done by government alone.
And I am just excited that as a result of the work that we’ve done with so many people over the past two years, businesses and organizations across America, including some of the best known names and brands, have already responded to this call.  Today, as part of Joining Forces, they are going to be announcing major new commitments to support military families, and you’ll all see those incredible commitments as we go forward, but we are tremendously grateful for so many of them stepping up so early.
Joining Forces is rooted in those American values of service and citizenship that have kept our country strong throughout history.  In World War II, for example, the whole nation went to war.  Just about every family was a military family, or knew someone that was. 
However, today, with an all-volunteer force, fewer Americans serve or know someone who does.  And unlike our troops, military families don’t wear uniforms, so we don’t always see them.  But like our troops, these families are proud to serve and they don’t complain, so as a result, the rest of us don’t always realize how hard it can be or what we can do to help lighten their load.
And I have to admit that I haven’t always realized it myself.  My father served in the Army, but he served before I was born, so I didn’t grow up in a military family.  I always revered our troops, but like many Americans, I didn’t see firsthand just how much our military families sacrifice as well.
And that’s why we’re Joining Forces.  This is about the responsibility that we each have to one another, as Americans.  It’s about the fact that, as Joe said, that 1 percent of Americans may be fighting on our behalf, but 100 percent of Americans need to be supporting our troops and their families.  This campaign is about renewing those bonds and those connections between those who serve and the rest of us who live free because of their service.
So this is a national initiative, and here’s how it’s going to work.  First, as part of a new public awareness campaign, we’re going to highlight the service of these families that Americans don’t always see, because the first step in taking action is awareness.  And the truth is that our military families are all around us.  We may not know it.  We’re going to remind Americans that most military families live off base, in thousands of communities across the country.  They’re our neighbors and our coworkers; the military spouse who puts a full day in at the office, then goes home to do the parenting of two while their husband or wife is deployed.
We’re going to remind them that most military children go to public schools.  They’re our kids’ classmates and teammates -- like the girl in your daughter’s class trying to make new friends and handle all the normal pressures of growing up, even as she worries whether Dad or Mom will come home safe.
Many of our National Guardsmen and Reservists and their families don’t live anywhere near a military base.  They’re in virtually every community in this country.  One day they’re our police officers, our firefighters, our doctors and our teachers. And then the next day they’re called to duty and deploy to a war zone.
Just about every county in America has sent a service member to Iraq or Afghanistan.  And their families, including Gold Star families who’ve made the ultimate sacrifice, they live all over America. 
And there probably isn’t a town in this country without a veteran.  So, in other words, we want Americans to realize that, in a way, every community is a military community.
So these are the stories that we’re going to tell.  These are the stories that we’re going to celebrate.  And to help us, we’re being joined by some outstanding folks who know a little thing about capturing the public’s attention -- folks like NASCAR and Walmart and Major League Baseball.  They’re going to be creating public service announcements.  Other PSAs will feature the likes of Oprah Winfrey and Steven Spielberg and Tom Hanks.  Everyone is stepping up. 
The major guilds in entertainment -- writers, producers, directors, actors -- all have committed to telling more stories of military families in TV shows and movies.  Working together, we’re going to make sure that our military families are never forgotten.
This leads to the second part of Joining Forces -- what we can actually do to support these families.  So we’re going to focus on the specific things our military families have told us they care most about, and things that I think that all of us can make a unique contribution to -- the areas of employment, education, wellness, and that includes mental health.
So in the area of employment, we’re going to be champions for our military spouses and veterans as they look for new jobs and advance their careers.  And we’ll make sure that businesses know just how lucky they’d be to have these talented spouses and veterans on their team.
In the area of education, as Jill said, we’re going to work to help our military children thrive in the classroom, even as they move between schools and deal with parents being deployed.  And we’re going to work to make it easier for military spouses to continue their education and get their degrees.
In the area of wellness, including good mental health, we’re going to remind this nation that just as our troops deserve the best support when dealing with the stresses of war and long deployments, so do military spouses and children.  They need the support as well.
Which brings me to the most important part of Joining Forces -- and that’s how we’re going to get all this done.
And as I said, this is a challenge to every segment of American society.  And our motto is simple:  Everyone can do something.  So we’re Joining Forces across the federal government.  Those nearly 50 commitments that the President mentioned are going to make such a difference for so many military families.
But these commitments also do something even more important.  They’re going to give military families a seat at the table across the federal government.  It means that we’ll all be working together to make sure that we’re forging new federal partnerships to serve military families for years to come.
We’re going to be Joining Forces with states and cities and local governments.  We want the whole country to know about states like Michigan and cities like Pittsburgh and Augusta, Georgia, that encourage folks to volunteer and support our troops and veterans and their families.
And states can make it so easy for these families.  They can make it easier for spouses to get their professional licenses and certification.  They can also help make it easier for military children to transfer between schools.  So every state, every city, and every town in this country can do something.
We’re Joining Forces with businesses, both large and small, including some of America’s biggest employers, which are making new commitments as we speak today.  Companies like Sears, Kmart, and Sam’s Club are telling military spouses who work at their stores that if they move to a new duty station, they’ll do their best to have a job waiting for those spouses.  Siemens is setting aside 10 percent of their open positions for veterans. 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is stepping up, encouraging its millions of members to hire military spouses and veterans; to find mentors for military wives and women veterans.  And the Chamber is going to host more than 100 job fairs across the country for these individuals.
Technology leaders like AOL, Indeed.com, Cisco, will help connect military spouses and veterans with employers that are hiring.  Companies like Hewlett-Packard and Microsoft will train military spouses in new technologies so they can start their own businesses.  And believe me, the list goes on and on, because every business can do something.
We’re Joining Forces with nonprofits, with reach -- their reach into communities all across the country.  The USO is going to expand its efforts to help Americans support military families right here on the home front. 
Jill said The Military Child Education Coalition is teaming up with the National PTA, and with more than 100 teaching colleges, to help educators and communities better serve our military kids.  The National Math and Science Initiative will be bringing Advanced Placement courses to tens of thousands of students, including military kids.  The Sierra Club and the YMCA are partnering with the National Military Family Association to get 15,000 military kids and families to camp this year.  The American Heart Association will help 100,000 military spouses and women veterans lead healthier lives.
And again, the list goes on and on.  Every one is stepping up, because every nonprofit can do something.
And finally, this is about all of us Joining Forces as Americans.  And we can do it right where we live and work.
As Jill said, if you’re a parent or a teacher, you could encourage your school to find new ways to support our military kids.  If you’re a lawyer, an accountant, a counselor, you can offer your services to a military family, pro bono.  If you’re a member of a church or a synagogue or a mosque, you could urge your faith community just to reach out to military families who are grieving the lost of a loved one.
It could be something as simple as mowing the lawn, shoveling the snow for that family down the street; telling that mom or dad that you’ll take their shift at the carpool; or lending a hand to that wounded warrior in your neighborhood.
You don’t even have to know a military family, because thanks to great organizations like Blue Star Families and their partnerships with the American Red Cross and ServiceNation, every American can write a letter to a military family and let them know that, in their honor, you’ll be serving or volunteering in their own community.  It’s that easy.
And if you ask any military family, they will tell you sometimes it’s the smallest things -- these simple gestures that say “thank you” that can make the biggest difference in their lives.
And if you need ideas, you don’t have to go far because we are also creating a new website, JoiningForces.gov, where Americans can come together, connect, and find out how they can take action, often right in their own communities, because every single American can do something.
And that includes me and Jill.  We’re not asking anybody to do anything that we won’t do ourselves.  So beginning tomorrow, we’re hitting the road.  Yes, Michelle and Jill on a road trip.  (Laughter.)  I think Jill is going to drive.  (Laughter.)  We’re going to be traveling throughout the country, celebrating the service of military families and the communities, and nonprofits and businesses and folks who support those families every day.  And at each stop, we are going to be encouraging every American to ask a simple question:  “How can I give back to these families who have given me so much?”  That’s the question.
So obviously I’m excited about this campaign.  And I know Jill is, too.  And we know that this cannot be something that we do just for this year, or just for the next year.  This isn’t just a short-term effort, because our military families deserve our respect and support at every stage of their lives, no matter who’s in office.
So it’s our hope that what we’re launching today becomes part of the fabric of our country.  And to make sure that it does, I am proud that one of America’s leading nonpartisan institutions focused on national security, the Center for a New American Security, has stepped forward to help coordinate Joining Forces.  It’s going to be guided by an advisory board of distinguished Americans with a wealth of experience in serving military families and bringing people together around a common cause, and those include General Stan McChrystal and Patty Shinseki.  Both of them are here today, and we are grateful to you both for leading this effort.  (Applause.)  Good stuff.  (Applause.)
So, Jill and I truly believe that if enough people across this great country realize just how much our military families do for us, and if we look in our own lives to see what we can offer, then there is absolutely no limit to what we can do together to keep these families, and our country, strong.  And if we do this, if we come together, I know that we’ll come closer to our vision of a nation that truly recognizes and honors our military families.
It’s an America where every soldier, sailor, airman, Marine and Coast Guardsman -- and woman –- can deploy knowing that their family will be taken care of back at home.
It’s an America where every military spouse has the support that he or she needs to keep their family strong and thriving.
It’s an America where every military child has the support they need to grow and learn and realize their dreams.
It’s an America where our veterans and their families, especially our Gold Star families who have sacrificed so much, are honored throughout the entirety of their lives.
In short, we see a nation where more Americans across every sector of society are Joining Forces on behalf of our military families.
And believe me, this is going to remain one of my defining missions as First Lady.
So I thank you all for joining us to help make this happen.  And Jill and I hope that this campaign will be worthy of the service and sacrifice and strength of every single military family in this country, and that it will make a real difference in their lives for years to come.
So thank you so much.  (Applause.)
END
1:02 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 March 17, 2011
Remarks by President Obama, Vice President Biden, and Prime Minister Enda Kenny of Ireland at a St. Patrick's Day Reception
7:18 P.M. EDT
     VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Hello, everybody.  Glen, wherever you are, thank you for that entertainment.  I don’t know how you got a Shriver to sing, but -- (laughter.)  Welcome to the White House, everyone, and happy St. Patrick’s Day.  (Applause.)
 
     You know, all of you Irishmen out there, my -- hey, Ambassador Rooney, how are you? -- they talk about the luck of the Irish.  My grandfather Ambrose Finnegan didn’t like that expression as much.  He liked the expression, he used to say, if you’re lucky enough to be Irish, well, you’re lucky enough.  (Laughter.)
 
And I think we’re all pretty lucky in here tonight -- lucky to be here at the White House, lucky to be here about to hear the two people I’m about to introduce.  And I’m fortunate to have the honor of being able to introduce Fionnuala Kenny and her husband, the Taoiseach.  In this town, in this administration -- it must be a bunch of Englishmen talking back there.  (Laughter and applause.)  I’m really diplomatic, aren’t I?  (Laughter.)  I’m really diplomatic.  I don’t know -- it’s in the blood, what can I say?  (Laughter.)
 
In this town, the President is known as Michelle Obama’s husband.  I am known as Jill Biden’s husband.  And after you meet Fionnuala, you’ll know why the Taoiseach is known as her husband.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, we’re here to celebrate friendship between two great nations, Ireland and the United States, and two nations that define me the most, and I expect define most of you.  There’s an old Irish proverb -- there’s a million of them -- but there’s an old Irish proverb that says there is no strength without unity.
 
And one of the things that has been the case for a long time is we celebrate in this house the unity derived from all of the Irish that have peopled this great country, 40 million of us claim it, and that beautiful Ireland.  And actually, since the birth of America on -- we have on March 17th, 1776, when the British forces under Sir William Howe evacuated Boston, literally there was a password to get to George Washington’s encampment, and it was Saint Patrick.  That was the password.
 
     Well, ladies and gentlemen, that still works here in the White House.  (Laughter.)  Just ask Bill Daley or Tom Donilon or McDonough or Brennan, the entire national security team -- it’s still Saint Patrick.  The President is surrounded by us.  (Laughter.)
 
     Ladies and gentlemen, there have been eight Irish Americans who signed the Declaration of Independence and a full 22 -- half our Presidents -- have claimed Irish heritage, including the one you’re about to hear from.  (Laughter.)  True.  (Applause.)  You know, my mom Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden used to say, honey, to be Irish -- and I really mean this -- she said, to be Irish is about family, it’s about faith, and it’s about courage.  She said, without courage you can’t love with abandon.
 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, that’s why she liked Barack Obama so much.  I think he got used to her calling him “honey” -- (laughter) -- but she thought that he embodied all those virtues.  And I can tell you from experience of working with him side by side these last two years, he abounds in courage.
 
     There’s also another Irish expression that says, a good friend is like a four-leaf clover -- hard to find and lucky to have.  I consider myself extremely lucky to have become and have two good friends in Michelle and Barack Obama.  And after spending the morning with the Taoiseach and his wife, I hope I found two more friends.
 
     Ladies and gentlemen, let me introduce you to my four friends and your friends, the President of the United States and Michelle Obama, as well as the Taoiseach and Fionnuala Kenny.  (Applause.)
 
     PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Good evening, everybody.  Welcome to the White House on this beautiful St. Patrick’s Day.  (Applause.)  It was remarked upon that the fountain is the appropriate green this year.  (Applause.)  Last year, Michelle asked the White House team to make the fountain green, and it was a little tepid.  (Laughter.)  So people just thought there was algae in the fountain.  (Laughter.)  This year they made sure that there was no confusion, so we’re very happy about that.  (Applause.)
 
     I am not going to stand up here very long because, as the old Irish saying goes, everyone is wise until he speaks.  (Laughter.)  And I know we’ve got some entertainment to get to.  But the Irish also tells us that what fills the eye fills the heart.  And tonight, in this room filled with so many friends both old and new, I can’t imagine a better place to be than right here with the sons and daughters of Ireland -- and those who wish they were.  (Laughter.)
 
     I want to start by welcoming Taoiseach Kenny and his lovely wife, Fionnuala.  Please give them a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  Now, poor Taoiseach, he’s only been in office for a little over a week.  (Laughter.)  He’s already jetlagged.  (Laughter.)  But I’m honored that he agreed to leave the unpacking for another day and fly across the ocean to be with us here tonight.
 
     We also have more than a few Irish and Irish American friends in the house tonight.  I want to thank our very talented performers, as well as the members of my administration and the members of Congress who are here.  (Applause.)  We are joined by three very Irish governors -- Martin O’Malley, Dan Malloy, and Pat Quinn.  Thank you for coming.  (Applause.)
 
     Every year at this time, we’re reminded of just how many strands of green are woven into our American story.  And even though St. Patrick’s Day has perhaps been better known for revelry than reflection, it’s also a chance for us to remember how the journey to America began for so many of our ancestors -- including, as I discovered as I was running for office, one of mine -- how millions of Irish boarded dank and crowded ships with a promise to send for their families later, often with no friends, no money, and nothing but hope waiting for them on the other side.
 
     Like so many immigrants who came to call this country home, these men and women were guided by a deep faith and an unwavering belief that here in America a better life is available for anybody who’s willing to try.  And even though they weren’t always welcomed in their new land, they persevered.  They built and led and defended our country while still holding fast to their heritage.  And in many ways, what it means to be Irish helped to define to what it means to be American.
 
That’s why today when we think about a Tip O’Neill -- whose daughter, by the way, is here tonight and his granddaughter, and it was wonderful to meet them -- (applause) -- or a Ronald Reagan, we see an example of how it’s possible to argue over policy without sacrificing friendship; how it’s easy to disagree without being disagreeable, if you make the effort.
 
When we think about a Henry Ford or a Cyrus McCormick, we see the ingenuity that has driven generations of Americans to build the businesses and create the inventions that have helped makes a nation an engine of prosperity.
 
     When we think about an Audie Murphy or a John King, two of the hundreds of Irish Americans who have won the Medal of Honor, we see the heroism and bravery that comes with risking your own life for your country.
 
When we think about a family like the Kennedys, we see a steadfast belief in the importance of service and the duty each of us has to stand up for those who can’t stand up for themselves.  (Applause.)
 
In so many ways, the Irish and their descendants have set an example for us as a people.  But they’ve also set an example for us as a nation struggling to be more just and more free.  In 1845, Frederick Douglass, the great fighter for freedom here in this country, had just published his Narrative of a Life of an American Slave.  And even as the book was a bestseller, Douglass began receiving steady streams of threats to his life.
 
So he decided to embark on a two-year lecture tour of the British Isles until things cooled down.  He began by spending four months in Ireland, far from the threat of slave catchers, where he quickly found common ground with the people locked in their struggle against oppression.
 
As Douglass wrote, “I have spent some of the happiest moments of my life since landing in this country.  I seem to have undergone a transformation.  I live a new life.”  It was at a Dublin rally that Douglass met the Irish nationalist Daniel O’Connell.  And soon, the two struck up an unlikely friendship.  O’Connell was a fierce opponent of slavery, and he began calling Douglass “the black O’Connell of the United States.”  (Laughter.)
 
For his part, Douglass drew inspiration from the Irishman’s courage and intelligence, ultimately modeling his own struggle for justice on O’Connell’s belief that change could be achieved peacefully through rule of law.  Daniel O’Connell never lived to see another great emancipator named Abraham Lincoln put pen to paper and bring slavery to an end.  But the two men shared a universal desire for freedom -- one that cannot be contained by language or culture or even the span of an ocean.
 
And stories like this remind us just how deeply intertwined our two nations are.  Nights like this remind us how much we share.  And so as we celebrate together, let us take a moment to appreciate all that Ireland has given to America -- the faith we keep, the family we hold close, the laughter and song and warmth we feel when surrounded by the ones we love.
 
On behalf of the American people I want to thank the people of Ireland.  In the years ahead, may our sons and daughters only grow closer.  And now, I would like to present to you the Taoiseach of Ireland.  Happy St. Patrick’s Day to all of you.  Taoiseach.  (Applause.)
 
PRIME MINISTER KENNY:  Thank you very much and happy St. Patrick’s day.  Mr. President, thank you for your warm invitation to join you here this evening.  Fionnuala and I are honored on behalf of the Irish people and delighted to accept your invitation.
 
On St. Patricks’s Day, sometimes we remember some of our leaders -- Michael Davitt, who began one of the great agrarian movements throughout Europe; the great Ulster clans of the O’Neills and the O’Donnells; the O’Connells of Munster -- I’ve left a book on Daniel O’Connell for your protocol section, Mr. President.  (Laughter.)  And dear I say it, the Obamas of Leinster.  (Applause.)  Certainly if that’s the case, I can tell you that in the history of the English language, never has a single apostrophe meant so much to so many.  (Laughter and applause.)
 
Yes, you see, there is no one as Irish as Barack Obama.  (Laughter and applause.)  And may I say, sir, Mr. President, they’re queuing up in the thousands to tell you that in Moneygall when you visit us in May of this year.  (Applause.)  And I want to say this, sir:  The news of your decision to visit Ireland in May has reverberated around the world already.  They’re causing a stir that you will see, sir, when you go there, that you will get a céad míle fáilte, which is 100,000 welcomes -- the traditional welcome of the Irish people.
 
     I’d like to echo the words of the President, because as we gather here in the White House this evening, we do remember the various ways and the different journeys that people took to get here.  The Irish, driven out by what we called an Gorta Mór, or the Great Hunger, when the potato crop from the New World failed.  As the writers said, in scattered lines they made for the quayside, their only sound the slow slap of their souls on the immigrant flagstones.
 
     But, you see, ours was not a self-contained journey, because on another Atlantic coast other people were waiting -- waiting to be herded into ships; mothers soothing children, perhaps not even their own; husbands calling for wives; wives calling for husbands.
 
Two peoples on the far coasts of one ocean, where in the words of Seamus Heaney, tireless waves came glinting, sifting from the Americas.  And that was Africa’s Cape Coast, and Ireland’s Cape Clear.  Two peoples who would cross that single dividing ocean -- the Irish to freedom; the Africans to slavery.
 
Though they didn’t know it, in time theirs were the genes that would build this great country of the United States of America.  (Applause.)  They actually are the genes that unite us here in the White House this evening, designed by an Irish architect, to claim and to celebrate Saint Patrick, who came himself to redeem the soul of a people.  And he -- he was slave.
 
Mr. President, at Cape Coast Clear, you said it seemed as if the walls were talking.  They might well have said:  respect, mercy, obligation -- never again.  Because I, too, believe in the intense, unyielding, but compassionate Patrick; that his life unites us here today not only in our Irish ancestry but also in our common heredity.
 
As President Kennedy said about his Family of Man two weeks before he passed away, “If our society is to promote the Family of Man, then let us realize the magnitude of our task.”  And in the places around the world, nobody knows that more than the man standing behind me, the President of the United States.
 
     Whether the Family of Man has to be promoted across the valleys of Kenya, or the mountains of Ireland, or the scattered islands of Indonesia, or in the wreckage of Japan with that country’s difficulties at the moment, or whether, Mr. President, we have to take it to places that are still forgotten around the world, this is our task.  This is the task of political leaders, because not only are we leaders but also fathers and parents teaching our children, our countries’ children, about duty and about obligation, the need to fight cruelty, the need to fight injustice and inhumanity, wherever it happens.  (Applause.)
 
Our stories, indeed, might be singular but we do know that our destiny, our children’s destiny, is a shared prospect.  Do as I do -- lead, teach by example, create a future from the unknown.  We’re glad, Mr. President, that you will visit us in a short time.  I hope, when you do so, your stay will symbolize the life-giving bond between Ireland and the United States of America.  We are your gateway to Europe.  And I say again this evening, that gateway is wide open and continues to be ready for business.
 
Mr. President, we meet here in this historic building almost at the spring equinox, when new light returns to our lives.  You will come to us in May, the start of what was known as the Celtic summer -- or as we call it in the Gaelic language, in the Irish language, Bealtaine, the feast of the bright fires.  And when you do, sir, you will return to your own people, your own place.  Mr. President, you will come, in a way, home to Ireland.
 
So tonight, let me paraphrase the words of one more famous than I:  Let the world go forth from this time and place.  Let it go forth high and clear into the eves of this great city; that the bonds between Ireland and America as warm and as strong as they’ve ever been in the history of our two great countries -- warm and strong and vigorous, and so they shall remain.  Because we are united, inspired, sustained by our faith -- our faith, I might say, in the audacity of hope.  (Applause.)
 
Thank you, Mr. President.  Thank you.  And God bless you and the people of America and the work you do for the oppressed and the disadvantaged around the world.  And thank you on behalf of the people of Ireland.
 
My concluding words are these:  I said to the President and the First Lady outside, I know now that miracles do happen.  The fountain is green and I’ve arrived in the East Room here in the White House.  (Laughter.)  One week in office:  enough to build the world -- that’s what the creator had.  If we keep this up, Ireland will be great again inside a very short time.  (Applause.)
 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Thank you.  All right.  With that, everybody, go ahead and have a party.  (Applause.)
END
7:40 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 11, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden in Chisinau, Moldova
Opera House Square
Chisinau, Moldova

2:15 P.M. (Local)
 
     THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Filat, and most importantly, Tina, your daughter who is sitting there with my granddaughter Finnegan.  They're 12-years-old each.  I'm not sure if Finnegan is going to come home with me.  This is so beautiful.
 
     Hello, Chisinau.  (Applause.)   And hello to everyone across the street.  (Applause.)  I want to thank you all on behalf of me and Jill, my wife, and our granddaughter for according us such a great honor on such a beautiful day.
 
     And I'd like to also thank all the people of Moldova for hosting this visit.  I have heard about your hospitality, but what I heard does not do justice to the hospitality I've received.  Again, thank you very, very much.  (Applause.)
 
     On behalf of President Obama, I want to say that this is truly a special privilege -- a privilege to be here at this transformative moment in your history, and quite frankly the history of the world.  There is much, much that is changing not only here in Central and Eastern Europe, but in North Africa, in the Middle East and throughout the world.  Freedom is in the air.  (Applause.)  And democracy is emerging in countries that for generations have known nothing but authoritarian rule. 
 
     In Tunisia and Egypt, people stood up for their rights, and they're now taking their first tentative steps toward democracy.  In Libya, people are fighting for those same rights in the face of violence from their own government.  And here -- here in this region, it has been over 20 years since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the United States has worked with you for a Europe that is whole, free and at peace.  (Applause.)
 
     We're not quite there yet, but let me tell you this we will stand-by-side with you as we finish this job.  (Applause.)  I come to Moldova from Moscow.  Russia and America are partners on a wide range of global challenges.  And over the past two years, we have reset our relations and produced real benefits -- not only for the Russian people and the American people, but I believe for the people of this region and the world, as well.
 
     When I was in Russia, I spoke with the leaders of the Russian government as well as the political opposition, leaders of business as well as civil society.  I spoke with them straightforwardly about the need to fight corruption, the need to strengthen democratic institutions, the need for a judicial system that is both trusted and fair.
 
     In Georgia, we support the emergence of a strong democracy and free markets, and the integrity of Georgia's territory.  We also are working with both parties -- Russians and Georgians -- to reduce the threat of renewed conflict.  In Ukraine, the world welcomed the Orange Revolution, but there is much hard work remaining to be done to sustain its success.  The Ukrainian people want a future that is democratic and European, and we intend to help them see it through.
 
     The people of Belarus have demanded and they deserve basic rights.  We have condemned the government of Belarus for the repression of its own citizens.  We've joined the European Union in imposing sanctions against that government, and we call for the immediate release of all political prisoners.  (Applause.)
 
     I am here today to congratulate you, not only on the 20th anniversary of your independence, but for the powerful -- (Applause.)  Yes, you can clap for yourselves.  (Applause.)  But also for the powerful message your journey toward democracy has sent to millions of people beyond your border. 
 
     You should be proud -- proud of what you have done.  Your experience here in Moldova proves that political transition can be peaceful, that free and fair elections and a genuine commitment to reform can turn democratic values into reality, and that around the world -- people around the world yearn for basic rights and freedom, no matter what language they use to demand them.
 
     You know from your own experience that achieving democracy is not easy, but you also know it is worth the struggle.  (Applause.)  President Obama and I along with the American people have watched that struggle and celebrated your successes, and we are determined to help you build on your achievements.  We strongly support your commitment to political and economic reforms and taking on hard issues.
 
     While we applaud your progress, let me be clear, there can be no democracy without a transparent legal system, without a commitment to fight corruption and an end to human trafficking.  (Applause.)
 
     On Transnistria, America has supported and will continue to support a settlement -- not any settlement, but a settlement that preserves Moldova's sovereignty and territorial integrity -- (applause) -- within -- within your internationally recognized borders.
 
     Formal negotiations with a real agenda should resume as soon as possible.  Transnistria's future lies inside Moldova -- (applause) -- within -- within the community of Europe.  The people of Moldova deserve an end to a dispute that has divided this great country for far too long.  (Applause.)
 
     Folks, political change is hard.  Economic reform can be even harder, especially when unemployment is high and prices are rising.  People everywhere, including in my own country, America, worry about jobs and prices, as well.  But as you reform your economy, more foreign investment will flow into Moldova, more of Moldova's businesses will enter foreign markets.  And that will add up to higher paying jobs and more jobs.
 
     As you continue on this journey, I promise you, America will be your partner.  Over five years, the United States -- over the next five years, the United States will provide a quarter of a billion dollars -- $262 million to support your agricultural industry.  (Applause.)  This assistance, God willing, will improve your roads to help your farmers get their goods to market, will make it easier for your farmers to secure the loans they need to buy better equipment.  We will work with the Moldovan government on economic policies to grow your economy to attract foreign investment, train civil society to become more effective advocates and help improve Moldova's schools.
 
     And by the way, Moldova has made its own contributions -- significant contributions to American society and to American culture.  Let me give you two recent examples.  A fellow named Rahm Emmanuel, President Obama's former chief of staff, who is the newly elected mayor of Chicago in Illinois, America's third largest city, he says that he has inherited his legendary toughness from his Moldovan grandfather.  (Applause.)  I'm serious.  Who became a labor leader in America after emigrating to the United States.
 
     And someone we appreciate even more, Natalie Portman, who last month won an Academy Award for best actress in America, I don't know whether you know this, but she told us she carries in her wallet a picture, a photograph of her Moldovan grandmother.  (Applause.)
 
     And I know this is not on the teleprompter, but she's a heck of a lot better looking than Rahm Emmanuel.  (laughter.)
 
     Look, folks, what Moldovans -- what all of you want for your future America supports, as well: a democratic and prosperous European state, a better life for you and your families. 
 
     America will walk with you on this journey you've undertaken for a simple reason: because a successful Moldova will benefit this region; it will benefit Europe; and it will benefit the United States of America.  You're small.  You're a small country, but you are tackling large consequential issues head-on.  I believe you and your leaders are up to that challenge.  A better future is within your reach.
 
     Take a look around you.  Think about your families.  Think about your children.  Think about what you left 20 years ago.  Think about freedom, democracy and prosperity -- what it will mean to your families and your children.  When you do that, I assure you no matter how tough the road, it will never be too hard.
 
     And I'm proud -- I'm proud to have had the opportunity to stand with you today to offer my country's congratulations and support on your 20th anniversary of independence and your continued -- your continued move toward democratic institutions and becoming part of Europe.
 
     Thank you.  May God bless America and may God bless Moldova.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
 
 
 
END
2:30 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 10, 2011
Vice President Biden's Remarks at Moscow State University
Moscow State University
Moscow, Russia
5:33 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Andy.  Rector, thank you.  It’s an honor to be here at Moscow State University.  And I want to thank the AmCham chamber for sponsoring this.
To the students that are here, I apologize.  In America, we have a rule.  You don’t have to wait any longer than 20 minutes for a full professor.  And for someone who is not a full professor, you need only wait 10 minutes.  (Laughter.  I’m honored you waited at all.  I do apologize to the business community, as well as the students, for keeping you waiting.
I want to publicly as well thank President Medvedev and Prime Minister Putin for their hospitality.  We have very good meetings, very long meetings, and I hope, productive.
And I want to thank AmCham Russia for sponsoring this event, working to foster a modern business climate after the fall of communism.
And, Rector, again, thank you for hosting us here at Moscow State University, which has given Russia and the world so many and such an extraordinary array of graduates, among them eight-- if I’m not mistaken, eight Nobel Laureates, including former President Gorbachev, who I have known for some time.
In addition to my wife, Jill, I brought along my granddaughter.  Her name is -- my number two granddaughter.  Her name is Finnegan Biden.  And I brought her along to Russia, because I wanted her to see this great country with her own eyes, the country of Pushkin’s poetry and Tolstoy’s prose, the country of Tchaikovsky’s compositions, and Zhukov’s and Gagarin’s heroic feats.  It is a rich and a noble culture.  And I’m delighted she has had a chance to get a -- just a little glimpse of it.
Let me also thank our Ambassador John Beyrle, and his team, for hosting me.  As you businesspeople know, there’s an old expression if you’re in the military -- but also if you’re in the diplomatic corps.  The good news is the commanding general is coming.  The bad news is the commanding general is coming.  On the diplomatic side, the good news is the Vice President is coming, and the bad news, the Vice President is coming because I’ve created an extraordinary amount of work for John’s incredible team.
But John is one of the best America has to offer.  And anyone who doubts the ability of Americans and Russians to work together, need only examine the history of John’s family.  His father, Joe -- Joseph was a hero in both Russia and the United States, an American soldier taken prisoner by the Nazis who went on -- later when he escaped to fight with the Red Army on the Eastern Front.  And now, more than 65 years later, his son is the American envoy to Moscow.  I think that’s a remarkable, remarkable story.
And today, I also want to address -- and the main reason I’m here -- is the state of U.S.-Russian relations.  I don’t need to tell anyone in this audience that our administration, when we took office in January of ‘09, our relationship with Russia had hit a fairly low point that had accumulated over the previous eight years.
Yes, so we saw a war between Russia and Georgia played out, and played a role in that decline.  But even before that conflict erupted in August of ‘08, a dangerous drift was underway in this important relationship.  While we no longer considered each other enemies, we couldn’t always tell from the rhetoric that was flying back and forth across the continent.
Ironically, this came at a time when American and Russian interests -- on nuclear arms control, nonproliferation, stabilizing Afghanistan, fighting terrorism, opening global markets and a range of other issues -- at a time when all of them, we were more closely aligned than ever on each and every one of those issues. 
So to seize this opportunity, President Obama and I proposed forging a fresh new start by, as I said in the initial speech on our foreign policy, by pressing a restart button, reset button.  We wanted to literally reset this relationship, reset it in a way that reflected our mutual interests, so that our countries could move forward together.
The President asked me to make that “reset” the focus of our administration’s first foreign policy speech, that I delivered several weeks after our   at the Munich Security Conference.  And I said then, and I quote, “the United States and Russia can disagree and still -- still -- work together where our interests coincide.  And they coincide in many places.”
Now, we know that pursuing this agenda -- we knew pursuing this agenda would be hard work, that old habits -- as we say in America, old habits die hard.  That’s why President Obama has met nearly a dozen times with President Medvedev, and why together we established a Bilateral Presidential Commission with working groups on key issues like arms control and energy, broadening the contacts between our two governments.
And in spite, in spite of what we call -- excuse me, in the spirit of what we call in America a “dual-track engagement,” we’ve also worked to deepen our ties between our countries’ business leaders, including many of the distinguished men and women in this room, as well as between our civil society groups.
Our business and civil society summits, alongside our presidential summits in 2009 and 2010, were in my view very important in strengthening these relationships.  We believed then, and still believe, in focusing on concrete outcomes that serve both countries’ interests, as President Obama puts it, “win-win,” situations.
And we reject -- we reject, the President and I -- the tired theory that our values and our interests must compete for influence over our politics.  We flat reject that notion because we believe and we will continue to stand up for our principles.  And I believe those principles make all of us, Americans and Russians alike, more secure, more prosperous, and more free.
Two years since we pressed that reset button, I would argue the benefits of this approach to both our countries are absolutely clear on issue after issue.
Arms control:  We signed and ratified a New START Treaty, which will reduce our deployment of strategic weapons while ensuring that we maintain stable and predictable verification. 
The two countries with the largest nuclear arsenals showed the world that they are serious about arms control and strengthening global nonproliferation.  And that gave us even more credibility to deal with the most egregious violators of their international commitments.
Iran:  With our partners in the so called P5 plus 1, we -- Russia and the United States -- gave Tehran a chance for meaningful dialogue based on mutual interests and mutual respect to develop peaceful nuclear means.  They simply rejected it.  So Russia and the United States, along with our partners on the U.N. Security Council, adopted what is known as Resolution 1929, the most extensive package of sanctions Iran has ever faced. 
And Moscow, on its own and to its own -- as costing it in dollars and rubles -- Moscow took another important step:  It canceled its contract to sell to Iran S-300, air-defense missile systems, which was an unambiguous sign -- an unambiguous sign -- of international resolve that Iran must address the concerns that we have over their nuclear program.
North Korea -— working closely with Russia and our other international partners on the threat posed by Pyongyang, we adopted another U.N. resolution, referred as 1874, which authorized inspections -- almost unprecedented, authorized inspections of vessels -- Korean vessels -- suspected of carrying nuclear materials into or out of their country.  And the nations of the world have cooperated.
I would argue it’s because Russia and the United States were leading in this effort.
Afghanistan -- we’re cooperating on what we call the Northern Distribution Network, which now brings vital supplies to the ISAF, International Security Forces, including American soldiers and civilians into Afghanistan. In addition to rail cars rolling through Russia with supplies, over 800 flights have carried nearly 120,000 passengers over Russian territory to Afghanistan.  That would have been thought impossible four years ago.
And Russia is also providing badly needed military equipment and training to the Afghan National Security Forces.  We’re also cooperating on drug eradication.
European security -- using America’s improved relationship with Russia as a model, we also reset relations between Russia and NATO during last year’s Lisbon Summit, and a great deal of credit goes to President Medvedev.  And we identified missile defense as a common project.  I’ve talked extensively with your leaders on this issue.  It will be difficult, but it will be a game-changer if we can get it done.  It will say to the world, the two largest superpowers in the world are mutually developing the ability to have missile defenses, which I would argue would have an extremely important impact on dissuading so many of the countries who are contemplating becoming nuclear powers from doing so.
This year, we’ll seek agreement on an ambitious work plan for cooperation on this once contentious issue.  And we’ll also pursue an agreement on negotiations to modernize and strengthen the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.  I’ve been around a long time -- the CFE Treaty has been something we’ve been working on since the late ‘70s.  We have an opportunity to make more progress.
Central Asia -- we’re working together to foster a stable  -- a stable, democratic government -- a stable, democratic government -- and I might add a great deal of the credit goes to your President -- in Kyrgyzstan, combating drug traffickers, eradicating polio -— steps that suggest we can move beyond the so-called “Grand Game” and “spheres of influence,” a Cold War relic in my view.
Cooperation on each of these important issues has made America more secure -- and I would argue, presumptuous of me, but I believe it’s made Russia more secure.
But the reset has also produced more subtle signs of progress, again ones that would not have been contemplated even four years ago.  Russian helicopters used for relief efforts in Sudan.  California firefighters helping to fight wildfires in central Russia.  American and Russian drug officers working side-by-side in Afghanistan, the world’s largest producer of heroin and opium as a consequence of it.  Student body presidents from American universities discussing democracy and human rights with Kremlin advisors.  And we’re very pleased that are here today in the audience.
These things clearly would have been hard to imagine amid the mistrust and ill will a little over two years ago.  And to some of you, they may sound small.  But having been involved in this relationship for over 36 years, they are more than the sum of their parts.
And if you think I’m exaggerating and overstating the case, consider the following statistics -- or polling.  In December of 2008 -- December of 2008, one month before we were sworn in as President and Vice President, polling showed that only 17 percent of all Russians had a positive opinion of the United States -- 17 percent.  This year, that number has jumped to over 60 percent.  Our goal is to have it continue to climb.
That same year, Americans ranked Russia as one of the top five countries threatening American security -- two years ago.  This year, only 2 percent of the entire American population say they view Russia as a threat.  All of this leads to one very important conclusion in the mind of one Vice President that I think is now beyond dispute: the reset is working.  Working for all of us, working for Russia.  And I would presumptuously suggest working for the world.
But there is still, still much work to be done to enhance our security cooperation and our closeness.
On the Caucasus -- we have a genuine disagreement not only with your leadership but with the vast majority of the Russian people over Georgia.  But there’s a larger principle at stake here in our view -- and I want to be straightforward because if friends cannot be straightforward with friends, it really isn’t friendship based on mutual trust.
We think there’s a larger principle at stake here.  As I said when I announced the reset at Munich I said, “It will remain our view that sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances.”
And further:  “We will not recognize any state having a sphere of influence.”  And almost regardless of the difficulty, we don't support any state deciding through force changing the leadership of an elected -- democratically elected individual.
We have also worked closely, though, with both Russia and Georgia to reduce the threat of further conflict.  As a result, Georgia recently restarted its commitment -- restated its commitment to non-use of first use of -- non-use of force, and commercial flights have resumed between Moscow and Tbilisi.  But we must do more to assist those displaced by the 2008 conflict and enable normal travel and commerce to occur.
Our joint diplomacy was essential and is essential in ending conflicts in other areas.  Excuse me -- Nagorno-Karabakh, where I would again commend President Medvedev for his tireless work for a peaceful and permanent settlement there.  
But the next frontier in our relationship -— and the main area in my view and the President of the United States’ view of future opportunities and challenges -— will be building stronger ties of trade and commerce that match the security cooperation we have accomplished over the last two years and hopefully will continue to grow.
In the 20th Century, the wealth of a nation was measured by the abundance of its natural resources, the expanse of its landmass or the size of its army.  Russia had all of those things.
But in the 21st Century, the true wealth of a nation is found in the creative minds of its people and their ability to innovate.  There, too, Russia is remarkably blessed.  Unleashing Russia’s full potential will be a boon and an opportunity not only for the United States and for Russians, but again for international commerce and peace and justice.
Already, our economic relationship is moving to center stage.  Pepsico has made a multi-billion dollar investment in Russia -- Russia’s leading juice and dietary producer.  Imagine five years ago, the likelihood that an American company could buy, in effect, the largest of anything in Russia.
Chevron and ExxonMobil recently announced major new deals with Russian partners.  General Electric is undertaking a major expansion of its operations here.  And John Deere last year opened a major manufacturing center in Moscow -- in the Moscow region -— and is already -- I met with the President -- I think he may be here -- yesterday -- they're already doubling its capacity and as a consequence, employment.  
And Alcoa is working closely -- very closely -- with a nanotechnology firm, Rusnano, on an array of high-tech products that are the future.
This week a coalition of public and private sector partners in Russia and the U.S. announced a new program, as well, supported by an American company, Johnson & Johnson.  That program will provide pregnant women and new mothers with health information via text messages -— a great example of how civil society, government, and the private sector can work together to find innovative solutions to shared challenges -- real challenges to real people, ordinary people.
And just yesterday, I witnessed the signing of a $2 billion sale of eight Boeing 777 aircraft to Aeroflot, expanding last year’s agreement to sell 50 737s to Russian Technologies.  These contracts were able to be done and the plane was able to be built I might add because of Russian titanium, ingenuity and the engineers here; as well as the brilliant engineers and workface back in the United States.  These contracts will create or sustain tens of thousands of jobs in Russia and in the United States.
On his visit to Silicon Valley last year, President Medvedev made clear Russia’s desire to bolster our partnership in the innovation economy -— a priority the United States shares, and the President of the United States has announced as the hallmark of what we’re attempting to do.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to -- Skolkovo -- to be in Skolkovo -- a high-tech hub on the outskirts of Moscow that has the promise of becoming the Silicon Valley of Russia.
Closer cooperation will allow American companies to benefit from greater access to Russia’s deep pool of talented engineers, mathematicians and computer scientists.
Mr. President, if you’ll forgive me to -- I will not mention the context, but yesterday we had this discussion -- a roundtable discussion of American businesses and CEOs from Russian business.  A Russian businessman said something that was true.  He said the reason why it’s good to be here in Russia and investing -- the United States -- is because of its market.  An interesting comment from the chairman of the board of Boeing in Russia, he said, with all due respect to my good friend, that may be true, but that's not the reason we’re here.  Other countries have four, five, six and seven times the capacity to purchase our planes in terms of their needs.  But we’re here.  He said let me tell you why we’re here.  We’re here because the best engineers in the world are here.  Many educated at this great university.
We’re also providing -- not as a gift.  When I say providing it sounds like we’re providing a gift -- we’re also -- American venture capitalists and other foreign investment is flowing into the Russia’s economy to allow it to diversify beyond your abundant natural resources -- metals, oil and gas -- and help Russia -- Russian start-ups get their ideas to market. 
Those of you who are studying business know that it’s one thing to have an idea, it’s another thing to get to market.  It takes people willing to make a gamble, make an investment, make a bet.
Already, several of America’s leading firms have shown their support for this vision, by committing to invest in the case of several venture capitalists over $1 billion dollars -- already committed -- investing in Russian high-tech industry. 
But despite these steps, our trading and investment relationship is not what it should be.  As a matter of fact, it was higher years ago than it is now.  Russia was America’s 37th largest export market in 2010.  The value of the goods that cross our border, the United States border with Canada and Mexico every few days exceeds the annual value of our trade with Russia.  We’ve got to do better.  We’ve got to do better.  And I believe we can.
This is one of the reasons the President and I so strongly support Russians accession to the World Trade Organization.  Accession will enable Russia to deepen its trade relations not only with the United States, but the rest of the world.  And it will give American companies a greater and more predictable -- important word, predictable -- access to Russia’s growing markets, expanding both U.S. exports and employment.
The renewed energy that Russian negotiators have brought to the table in this accession effort and Moscow’s political will to get the job done are for the first time in a long time genuinely moving things forward.
We’re making progress on these issues that have caused so much friction in the past.  We’re making progress on agricultural trade, sanitary regulations, enforcement of intellectual property rights, though we still have more work to do.
So let me make this as clear as I possibly can:  President Obama and I strongly support and want to see Russia in WTO.  We’ve made that clear to the Congress; we’ve made that clear the world; and we’ve made that clear to anybody who is willing to listen.
It’s better for America -- and presumptuous of me to say this, never tell another man his business or another country their interest -- but it’s better for America, and I believe better for Russia to be able to trade with each other under predictable and transparent rules.  And that’s also why we’re going to work with Congress to terminate the Jackson-Vanik amendment.
These steps are critical components to our Administration’s trade agenda.  There used to be a bank robber in America in the ‘30s.  His name was Willie Sutton.  And they once asked Willie Sutton, why do you rob banks, Willie.  He said, that’s where the money is.  (Laughter.)  We’re not doing Russia a favor.  This is in the overall best interest, we think, of Russia, but we know for the United States.  We know for our unemployment -- our employment to grow, trade, exports have to grow as well. 
So we expect Russia’s leaders to continue working with us to move the processes along.  But you in this room know as well as anyone that even if liberalizing our trading relationship, Russia’s business and legal climate quite frankly is going to have to continue to improve because right now for many companies it presents a fundamental obstacle.
In early 2008, President Medvedev described Russia as, and I quote, “a country of legal nihilism,” -- not my quote, his quote -- and he prescribed a set of reforms.  
The simple fact is this:  Pragmatic businessmen, particularly -- and women -- particularly those who are not so big that they can go directly to each of our governments to resolve their differences -- they want to invest where they can expect a reasonable return and an absolute assurance that the legal system in the country they're investing in will provide due process.
I don't think it’s reasonable to expect Americans, or Europeans, or Russians themselves, to invest confidently where  -- in a country in which there are infamous cases in which property rights were violated and not protected.  It may be unfair, but it is a perception. 
A country in which investors -- Russian and American -- can lose when they succeed -- lose when they succeed -- in fact, have lost fortunes because of legal abuses.
A country which -- a company which can be seized, or an owner imprisoned on a politician’s whim; in which a lawyer like Sergei Magnitsky -- I hope I pronounced that correctly -- can be arrested after accusing the police of fraud and then die in detention before being tried. 
No amount of government cheerleading or public relations or U.S. support or rebranding will bring wronged or nervous investors back to a market they perceive to have these shortcomings.  Only bold and genuine change.  I’m not here to lecture.  I’m not here to preach.  I’m not here to tell Russia what to do.  But I know from my experience, almost every country I visit, particularly smaller ones, not great countries like Russia, the first thing they’ll tell me is, can you encourage, Mr. Vice President, American businesses to invest here.
And there’s the same answer:  Get your system right.  Don't make it a gamble.  Have certainty.
Over the past few months alone, our Administration has spoken out against allegations of misconduct in the trial of -- excuse me -- Khodorkovsky -- you can tell I didn't do very well in Russian -- and of the beating and detention of “Strategy 31” demonstrators.
Some of you may say, well, how can you say those things out loud, Mr. Vice President, and expect to have a better relationship.  They're necessary to have a good relationship.   We should not have to make choices.  (Applause.)  We will continue to object when we think human rights are violated or democracy and the rule of law is undermined. 
For us, these are matters of principle, but I would argue they’re also matters of pragmatism.  History shows that in industrialized societies, economic modernization and political modernization go hand-in-hand.  You don't get one without the other.  Or put it this way, you don't get industrial modernization without political modernization.  And I realize -- I realize -- it’s been a short journey -- a short journey since, as we say in the West, the wall came down.  And I realize there is an awful lot that’s been accomplished.  But -- but -- modernization in every way is essential.
I think that’s why so many Russians now call on their country to strengthen their democratic institutions.  Courts must be empowered to uphold the rule of law and protect those playing by the rules.
Non-governmental watchdogs should be applauded as patriots, not traitors.  As a famous American jurist once said, a Supreme Court justice, he said, sunlight is the best disinfectant -- sunlight is the best disinfectant.  In today’s society, we’d probably say transparency is the best lubricant.
Journalists must be able to publish without fear of retribution.  In my country it was a newspaper, not the FBI, or the Justice Department, it was a newspaper, the Washington Post that brought down a President for illegal actions.
Thomas Jefferson said that if he only had a choice of a free press or what we had.  He said he’d choose a free press.  It’s the greatest guarantee of freedom there is, the so-called Third Estate.  And believe me to the American press up there, they drive me crazy.  (Laughter.)  It’s not like they say nice things about me all the time.  But I really mean it:  It is the single best guarantee of political freedom. 
And viable opposition -- and public parties that are able to compete is also essential to good governance.  Just as competition between top athletes produces better players and better teams, it’s also true that that works as well among firms who provide better services and better products.  Political competition means better candidates, better politics and most importantly, governments that better represent the will of their people.
In my view, the Russian people already understand this. Polls shows that most Russians want to choose their national and local leaders in competitive elections.  They want to be able to assemble freely, and they want a media to be independent of the state.  And they want to live in a country that fights corruption.
That’s democracy.  They're the ingredients of democracy.  So I urge all of you students here:  Don't compromise on the basic elements of democracy.  You need not make that Faustian bargain.
And it’s also the message I heard recently when President Medvedev said last week -- and I quote him -- “freedom cannot be postponed.”  Joe Biden didn't say that.  The President of Russia said that.
And when Deputy Premier and Finance Minister Kudrin said that “only fair elections can give the authorities the mandate of trust we need to help implement economic reforms.”  That's a Russian leader, not an American leader.
Russia and America both have a lot to gain if these sentiments are turned into actions, which I am hopeful they will be.
Now, there are some in Russia who say we hold your country to an unreasonably high standard.  It is true our expectations are high, but it’s because we’ve learned during the Cold War just how capable the Russian people are.  When you launched Sputnik we had to marshal our greatest intellectual talents to begin to meet the challenge.  And we had no illusions ever about the capacity of our then-adversary.
And in this new era of partnership, our respect for the Russian people as innovators, as thinkers remains undiminished.  Unleashing the intellectual capacity of this country is not only in Russia’s interest but it’s in America’s national interest; and I would argue the world’s interest.  This is no longer a zero-sum game.
Folks, as you well know, we’ve already come a long way.  I visited Moscow for the first time in ’73, but in the summer of ’79, I was asked by then President Carter, some 30 years ago, to lead a delegation of United States Senators who were uncertain about the SALT Talks, SALT II -- Strategic Arms Limitation Talks.  And I was a strong supporter of that treaty. 
But there were a group of new senators who were not familiar with the treaty, and agnostic on it.  And I was asked to bring nine of them to Russia.  And we sat across -- I sat across a table -- a conference table in the Kremlin, across the table from Leonid Brezhnev.  To his left was Defense Minister Ustinov and to his right was Premier Kosygin.
And to state the obvious, it was a very different time.  And I recall President Brezhnev was sicker than we thought then.  And he excused himself and left the meeting early and turned it over to Kosygin, Premier Kosygin, who in his opening statement said the following -- I will never forget it -- he said:  Before we begin our discussion, Senator, let's agree that we do not trust you, and you do not trust us.  And we both have good reason.  (Laughter.)  Literally.
He was absolutely right back then.  But he would be absolutely wrong today.  Russians and Americans inside and outside of government have worked extremely hard to overcome decades of mistrust, to identify common ground, to fashion a more secure and more prosperous future for both countries.
And in the second decade of this new century, the United States and Russia no longer have good reason not to trust one another.  There is no good reason not to trust one another.
It’s legitimate to be skeptical as you are in dealing with any nation because their self-interest may be different to you.  But it’s not -- does not translate into:  We cannot trust.
If two great nations that for 40 years stood on the opposite sides of the 20th century’s deepest divide can stand side-by-side facing the 21st century challenges, it will benefit not just the American people and the Russian people, but all people. 
That future is not just the stuff of which dreams are made of.  We are already moving in that direction.  Yes, it can be knocked off course.  But we are already moving in that direction.  And I say to you young people in this audience, it’s incumbent upon you and incumbent upon the young people of my country to not allow us to get off that path, to stay in this direction.
And I know that for many of you here today, this will be a joint effort -- that you’ll join us.  There’s much to overcome, but there’s much we’ve done.  And I would argue that based on what we’ve recently done, it’s a clear indication we can fundamentally change this relationship on a permanent basis.
Thank you all for being so gracious waiting and even more gracious listening.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
6:14 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 10, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin
The White House
Moscow, Russia
12:46 P.M. (Local)
PRIME MINISTER PUTIN: (As translated.)  Mr. Vice President -- (inaudible) -- there are quite a few things to enjoy in Moscow.  And you haven't been here for quite a while.  Since you've been here last time, and over this period of time, Moscow and Russia has changed a lot, and for the better I might add.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I would agree.
PRIME MINISTER PUTIN:  (As translated.)  You might be interested in getting to know Russia better, visiting other sights and cities.  And on top of that, the relationship between our two countries has been developing quite well.  Last year, the (inaudible) Russia has grown by 29 percent. 
Turning -- we have completed several important things, including seeding for and verification of START III, and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.  And the major American companies are doing business in Russia and are doing well.  To name a few, General Electric, Boeing and Chevron -- virtually all the biggest companies are here.
And it is especially pleasing for us to witness the rise of the presence of big Russian investments between -- again, we are very pleased and very thankful to you for the fact that this has been -- (inaudible) -- and very sensitive areas such as I referred to earlier, use of nuclear energy.  And I'm pleased with the fact that all of it has been passed through the procedures of the Foreign Investment Commission, and we are grateful for you for that to happen.
Again, it was very obvious to see the (inaudible) between the U.S. and Russian people is on the right track.
Currently, we are in the process of negotiating the possibility of the visa-free exchange between Russia and the countries of the European Union.  The fact of the matter is, the U.S. enjoys this visa-free regime of exchange with virtually all of those countries in Europe.
This will be an important step in development of the Russia-U.S. relationship if we work first to introduce this visa-free regime of exchange between U.S.-Russia rather than European Union and Russia.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Good idea.
PRIME MINISTER PUTIN:  (As translated.)  Let's look to break all the outdated stereotypes concerning Russia and the U.S.  Thus we have turned over a very substantial part of our history during this stage and we have started to have everything new.  That would support absolutely before the -- in the relationship between Russia and the U.S.
And with this positive relation on your part, Distinguished Mr. Vice President, such an important person in the U.S. administration with clout (inaudible).
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. Prime Minister, in case you haven't noticed, there's a real difference between being President and Vice President.  The very good news is the President and I agree 100 percent on the need to continue to establish a closer and closer relationship.
That's why the very first foreign policy annunciation our administration made was when I made the speech in Munich that it was time to push the reset button and change the atmosphere.
I would view the previous eight years -- did not take advantage of the opportunities that exist for both our countries.  It does not really matter how -- it's in our self-interest and I hope in the self-interest of Russia to have our relationship grow.
I've made one observation the last two years, when other countries around the globe have a problem they either go to Moscow or Washington.  They don't want to go to the other capitals. 
We have an opportunity to build on this over the years.  Not only on New START, cooperation in Afghanistan, cooperation on drugs, cooperation in -- a whole range of other areas -- now is the time to focus on the economy.
You mentioned Boeing; yesterday, I met with a group of American and Russian CEOs -- conference.  A Russian -- the chairman of a Russian organization, I'll not state it, said that there was reason for American companies to be here because the markets are here and named some other reasons why it was in the interest of American companies. 
The chairman of Boeing USA in Russia said, I beg to disagree with my friend.  He said the market in China for aircraft is seven times bigger.  He said let me tell you why we're here.  Russia has the best engineers in the world.  Russia has intellectual capital.  Russia is a great nation.  Your titanium lets the planes fly that you buy. 
PRIME MINISTER PUTIN:  (As translated.)  Allow me to make a point, we have the largest in the world engineering center here in Moscow.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  There's a reason.  Mr. Prime Minister, I've been around a long time.  The first time I was here -- the second time I was here, I was here meeting with President Brezhnev.  We were trying to pass SALT II --
END
12:58 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 09, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. at a Roundtable Discussion with American and Russian Business Leaders
Moscow School of Management Skolkovo
Moscow, Russia
3:20 P.M. (Local)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Deputy Prime Minister.  I can assure you our support is real.  What you're being told by our European friends and others is true.  We are working very hard to make WTO a reality for Russia and for us.  It's very much in our interest as it is in Russia's.
I want to thank you all for being here and giving me the opportunity to have a chance to have a conversation with you.  Resetting our relationships with Russia has in the view of the President and my view, as well, provided the momentum for some improved cooperation on a whole range -- a whole range of issues including arms control and nuclear proliferation, Afghanistan, Iran, North Korea.  But one area which we need to do more -- excuse me, I have a cold -- one area which we have to do more is to fully realize the potential -- and there's real potential -- in our relationship which lies in bilateral trade and investment. 
And the primary purpose of my visit is to explore how we can resolve the remaining challenges in our economic relationship -- because they must be resolved.  To begin with -- I'll say it again -- the United States strongly supports Russia's accession to the WTO.  And we are working with Russian negotiators in Geneva to move this process forward.  And I think we're making real progress.  We're making real progress on bilateral issues that have caused friction in the past such as agricultural trade and enforcement of intellectual property rights.
And our administration also strongly supports -- I want to make this clear -- strongly supports the lifting of Jackson-Vanik.  And we are aware of the benefits that will flow to U.S. companies from a freer and more open trade regime between the United States and Russia and quite frankly worldwide.  But we also know -- we've often told Russian leaders that investors and companies are looking not just for better trade policies but for assurances that the legal system that exists in each of the countries in which they wish to invest, the legal system treats them fairly and acts on their concerns swiftly.
That is why we're working with you, Mr. Deputy Prime Minister, and your colleagues to improve the investment climate, to promote the rule of law and to tackle some endemic corruption.  The Bilateral Presidential Commission is an important venue for our intergovernmental efforts.  And we are using it to develop a more adept cadre of managers on both sides of the Atlantic, to improve our procurement systems, and to address issues that you and your colleagues have raised such as the difficulty of obtaining visas.
But beyond negotiations between our governments, we're also relying heavily quite frankly on the emerging connections that all of you around this table represent between Russian and American business leaders and leaders in civil society.
Contacts among citizens are critical, almost as critical as the contacts between our governments, in fostering greater understanding and building our societies together.
And finally, I want you to know that we fully support President Medvedev's vision of a nation powered by innovation and human capital, and that we have a deep respect -- a deep respect -- for the pool of talent and the passion of the Russian people.  Indeed, we share a similar vision for our own nation.
So I want to thank you all for being here, and I'd like to open this for discussion.  And maybe with your permission, Mr. Deputy Prime Minister, we obviously want to see this new venture succeed.  It's an impressive facility, and with a great deal of promise.  And I look forward -- I've been visiting Russia since 1973, I look forward to come back when this a rival of Silicon Valley.  It would benefit all of us were that occur.
And it's an impressive building, but one of the questions that I think we -- I'd like to ask all you business leaders, particularly you Russian CEOs, is how can we help.  How can we help?  How can each of our governments help?
We understand the free enterprise system is the engine that's going to ultimately create -- make this a success, but we also know from our own experience in Silicon Valley that government can either be an impediment or it can be a help.  I would argue that Stanford University wasn't an impediment.  I would argue that the hundred of billions -- millions of dollars we invested in Stanford wasn't an impediment.  And so the question is what can we do to help.
And my observation -- and I have a bad habit of being straightforward -- my observation is if a company is big enough and successful enough and has deep enough pockets, it can weather the difficult terrain that sometimes exists in doing business here and in other places.
But the SMEs -- the capricious nature of the system, sometimes is viewed as a real impediment to the small- and medium-sized enterprises.  So I hope we can have an open discussion about how each of our governments can be a positive influence in realizing what again is in the mutual self-interest of both our countries, and that is the success of this venture and the growing success and relationship between American and Russian businesses and enterprises.
So again, I thank you all very, very much for being here.
END
3:27 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 08, 2011
Remarks By Vice President Joe Biden and President Tarja Halonen Of Finland Upon The Conclusion Of Their Bilateral Meeting
Presidential Palace
Helsinki, Finland
11:25 A.M. (Local)
PRESIDENT HALONEN:  So once again, good morning to everybody.  I think that Vice President Biden has chosen a very, very good day to visit Finland because today marks the 100 years anniversary of the International Women's Day.  And I think that both -- you yourself, your wife and your granddaughter are very pleased at that.
So you already know that we all very warmly welcome you, Vice President Biden, to Finland.  Our discussions today have been fruitful, and I have a feeling that we have succeeded update quite many topical issues.  Of course, it was too short time, anyway.
But relations between Finland and the United States of America are excellent and the reason to support continuation of many contacts.  But as we have also said, the United States is an important partner for us -- for Finland, for Europe.  And I hope so that old friends have strong ties, and we could also be looking for new opportunities to cooperate.  Finland is committed to develop further our bilateral relations in all things -- I've already mentioned cultural cooperation, trade, investments, green economy, clean technologies.  I know you are interested in the welfare state system, health, education, gender -- whatever you mentioned earlier.
But we are a part of the -- part of the global system, the part of the world.  I already said that I felt very strongly when President Obama -- first time held a speech in the United States, General Assembly.  And I was witnessing him, and I had gained a feeling that it was a very, very welcome speech.  So I'm very pleased then with President Barack Obama and his administration.  You yourself have been placing more emphasis on the work done in the United Nations and other multilateral organizations.  We do need it.  We are very happy that your administration, including also Hillary Clinton, have taken very strong interest in women in all speeches and always done in security -- and everywhere.
So the United States and Europe have worked hard for democracy, human rights and the rule of law and people decide what is values is very strong. 
We spoke also of the recent events in Northern Africa and in Libya, particularly.  And there are signs that the international community is quite unanimous on that, that the will of the people should be that what we are hoping for, not giving the possibilities only for those who have very strong military and many forces.
So both the humanitarian situation and also the grasp for the stability of the -- are on our mind.  And I give it more for you how you feel about Northern Africa. 
Finland and United States have worked side by side in many crises, humanitarian operations and I think that we have a respect for both sides concerning Afghanistan and also many other countless systems. 
Finland is not a member of NATO, but an acting Partnership for Peace country, such as Sweden, Austria and Ireland, for example.  And we share -- both a responsibility in many ways -- to work.  So -- for the -- it's for the Afghans for themselves -- democracy, the rule of law and the respect of human rights, including the rights of women and the girls.  But as we discussed Afghanistan, we left all -- the crisis of -- so what has been committed is past, but looking forward to speak more for the sustainable development of the global work and for both of our countries.  So I do hope so that we can find those ways how to combine stable economic growth, social justice and ecologically sustainable development.  We will have a good -- with our governments, with a lot of the good ministers.
To the media I would say that it's not only the President and the Prime Minister in Finland who are women, but -- aside my job, in the government, there are also ladies.  
And what the world is needing, more women -- but also more progressive men because it's not -- having lots of those.  So, Mr. Biden, you are most welcome.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you, Madam President.  I apologize for -- we kept the press a little bit.  I would prefer that I had a whole day to spend with the President.  I notice a couple of you remarking that we keep smiling and laughing.  There's a whole lot of reasons for that.  Most of all it's based on how comfortable the President has made me feel and all our countrymen.
Our ambassador was -- who we're very proud of -- was saying nothing but good things about his stay here in Finland and about you, Madam President.
And we have agreed -- I've invited the President, if she has the time when she's in the States, I'd like to take her up on her offer to spend more time with me because there's so much more that we have to talk about.  It's great to be back here in Helsinki.  This is an absolutely beautiful capital with a very, very long history of very important contributions to international affairs.
It seems like yesterday -- I know you're not old enough to remember but I remember as a U.S. senator the Helsinki Accords and how --
PRESIDENT HALONEN: We are exactly the same age.  (Laughter.)  Both 68 years old.  (Laughter.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  But seriously when you think about how the world has changed, how it's changed so remarkably.  And I would mark the Helsinki Accords as one of those moments when the tides of history really began to move.  And Finland remains in the forefront of a range of global challenges.
The President was very complimentary about the remarks of the address of my President to the General Assembly, and I was telling her that the President and I -- but the President feels very strongly that it's not sufficient that America exercises a leadership role merely by the example of its power, but by the power of our example -- not just by the example of our power, but the power of our example.
And we understand fully and welcome the fact that this is a world in which no one nation has the capacity to change the course of history for the better.  Some have the capacity to change it for the worse, but no one nation has the capacity to change it for the better. 
The American people and the people of Finland enjoy a strong and very enduring relationship, reflecting of the fact that we've often stood shoulder-to-shoulder in responding to global crises, as we continue to do.  And in that vein, I want to thank the President for her recent trip to the Middle East, which continued to demonstrate Finland's commitment to the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, and her visit to Afghanistan.  We almost were there the exact same day.
PRESIDENT HALONEN:  Yes, it was.
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  I think we missed by a day or two.
I have made multiple visits to Afghanistan, and yet we found that our assessment was fairly consistent as to where we stand at the moment, and we have been standing, quite frankly, side-by-side in the International Security Assistance Force. In Mazar-e-Sharif, the Fins and the Swedes have done a great, great job, and we appreciate them very, very much.
In fact, as I said, we had a very similar view about the commitment that was taken -- and by the way, Finland has been just a great and critical partner also in unleashing economic potential, new technologies in combating climate change, in combating nuclear proliferation and in a responsible search -- I emphasize a responsible search -- for resources in the Arctic region, which we look to Finland's leadership and example.
And innovation, as we both discussed, is the key -- is the key to the future -- and Finland has been a renowned global leader in that department fueled by a truly world-class system of public education, which I also sought some input -- didn't have enough time really to talk about it more -- but I hope when the President is in New York, you may be able to come to Washington -- about the great success of your public education system, which is of the highest priority for President Obama and me in the United States.
And by the way, as a hockey fan, Madam President, my wife Jill, who is truly a rabid, as we say in the vernacular at home -- a rabid hockey fan -- a Philadelphia Flyers fan, we are so happy to -- a number of the contributions made by the Finnish people to the National Hockey League.  (Laughter.)  And in fact, as a Philadelphia Flyers fan, my wife pointed to me that Kimmo just -- Timonen just scored his 100th goal this weekend in the National Hockey League.  (Laughter.)  Although, it was in a losing endeavor for the Philadelphia Flyers, but we expect a great deal from him as a defenseman.  And we expect that when he -- when the Flyers win the Stanley Cup, maybe they'll let him bring it home to show it everyone here.
PRESIDENT HALONEN:  So speaking about the ice hockey, so I spoke a lot about the good neighborhood relations with Sweden and Russia.  But you can forget them all concerning ice hockey.  (Laughter.)
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  President Obama has said many times, Madam President, the United States supports a strong and united Europe so that together -- together -- we can face and meet the extraordinary challenges and seize the extraordinary opportunities of our time.
We are extremely grateful, and I mean this sincerely that Finland shares our vision of a robust transatlantic relationship.  And we also thank you for all you've done to make that relationship real and make it thrive.
Let me conclude by saying that it seems only fitting to be here in Helsinki on International Women's Day.  It is not hyperbole to suggest that Finland has been a leader in the world -- in the world -- a pioneer when it comes to women having the right to an equal -- equal -- place in society.  And I believe that to be the single greatest moral imperative of our time.  And I mean that literally. 
Now, it's easy for me to say that here on International Women's Day, but the American press that's here -- whether they would agree or not, they can tell you that I've spent the bulk of my career as a United States senator and as Vice President promoting women's rights.  I was the author of, in our case, a landmark piece of legislation called the Violence Against Women Act.  Senator Lugar and I as senators, and now as Vice President, we're trying to promote the International Violence Against Women Act.  And we also -- I will tell you, if you excuse me, as we used to say in the Senate, Madam President, the U.S. Senate, this is a point of personal privilege.  I told you this story, but I'm going to tell it.  My staff is going, oh, God, what is he going to say.  (Laughter.)
But last night, sitting in the Government House with my 12, almost 13-year-old granddaughter and my wife, who is a doctor and a professor at a college, a community college.  My wife was saying how great it was that you were president, and there is a women prime minister.  And my little 12-year-old chimed up from the couch and said, "And, Pop, 40 percent of their congress" -- she calls it, their parliament -- "of their congress is women.  Isn't that great!"  (Laughter.)  That's my 12-year-old granddaughter.
And so I just want you to know the leadership of Finland has not gone unnoticed.  And we look to Finland for the example that sets -- we were -- what we were laughing about as we were walking in is, we were exchanging stories about our mothers.  And my mother would occasionally quote an old proverb which says that, women hold up half the sky.  Women hold up half the sky.
In my household, they hold up two-thirds of the sky.  All kidding aside, the single most civic-significant thing we can do in the 21st century to impact on the prospect of peace and security is to educate more women -- to have women, particularly in other parts of the less developed world have equal access to opportunity.
As you remember, Madam President, the U.N. sponsored a study on the Muslim world, the Arab world and said the most significant -- they were Arab scholars, Muslim scholars -- the single most significant thing that could happen would be to liberate women in that part of the world.  I'm here to also pay tribute to the leadership, the incredible leadership of Finland in that regard.  And if there's any nation in which I can stand on the 100th Anniversary of International Women's Day, this is the most appropriate place to stand, and you're the most appropriate person to stand with.
Thank you. 
END          
11:41 A.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 February 28, 2011
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Jill Biden to the National Governors Association
10:54 A.M. EST
DR. BIDEN:  Good morning, and thanks to all of you for inviting us here today.  It was a great time last night, wasn’t it?  We had a great day --
 
  MRS. OBAMA:  Whooo!  (Laughter and applause.)
 
  DR. BIDEN:  So Michelle and I will be joining your spouses shortly for lunch.
 
But we wanted to speak to you today about something that’s very important to all of us:  military families.
 
Over the past two years, we have had the privilege of traveling around the country and around the world, visiting with service members and their families, and hearing their stories firsthand.  Many of the stories are about the pride these families have in serving our country.  But there are also challenges.
 
We bring the concerns back to the White House, and the President and the Vice President and the Cabinet have responded by committing attention and resources to support our military families.
 
We know that each of you shares our commitment by supporting our troops and their families.  Many of you have active bases in your states, and all of you have Guard and Reserve families.
 
We know well the tremendous service they provide to our country.  Today, Michelle and I want to talk to you about our efforts to increase awareness of the unique experiences of military families.
 
We want to take the opportunity to thank you for your ongoing support and ask for your feedback about the needs and concerns of military families in your states.
 
Many of you know that my son was deployed to Iraq as a member of the Delaware Army National Guard.   He is back now, but I will always remember the mixture of pride and concern that I felt throughout his deployment.
 
I know I don’t have to tell any of you just how critical the National Guard is to our national security.   Tens of thousands of our brave citizen soldiers are serving in Iraq, Afghanistan, and other regions –- and taken together, they make up nearly one half of our nation’s military strength.
 
They also respond to national disasters, humanitarian crises –- from 9/11 to Hurricane Katrina, to areas in need around the world -- they answer the call under your leadership.
 
As a military mom, I know what a difference it makes when individuals or groups reach out to show support to service members and their families.
 
I’ve seen through my work with small grassroots organization at home called Delaware Boots on the Ground that community groups can make a huge difference.
 
Where a military family in Delaware has a need, we try to meet it, whether it’s physical labor or repairs around the house, a fun night out for the kids, or other simple ways individuals, businesses and groups can support a family through a deployment.
 
There are small and effective groups like this all over the country -- like one in Minnesota that collects top-brand hockey equipment for military children, or the barbecue lovers in Ohio that travel the state providing meals for military family picnics, deployment and welcome-home ceremonies, or the accountants across the country that dedicate their talents every spring to help with tax returns.
 
As an educator, I love hearing about the ways schools and teachers support military children during the deployment of a parent.
 
Just a few weeks ago, an amazing teacher near Ft. Stewart in Georgia told me how she sets up parent-teacher conferences over the Internet, so she can update deployed parents on their children’s progress in the classroom.  Many of the military children in that school keep laminated pictures of their deployed parent on their desk.
 
There are so many great and inspiring stories which demonstrate that every American can take their time, their expertise and their passion and use it to support and thank a military family.
 
Michelle and I have talked a lot about the ways that all Americans can support our troops and thank these men and women for their service.
 
And now, we are trying to encourage all Americans to join us in this effort.
 
As long as we have the privilege and the honor of serving in our roles, the First Lady and I will do whatever we can to support those who protect us -- and we look forward to working with you and your spouses on these ongoing efforts.
 
And now it is my pleasure to introduce my partner, my friend, your First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you.  Thanks so much, Jill.  And again, welcome.  I hope you all had a lovely evening last night.  Got your groove on.  (Laughter.)  But we had a great time, so I hope you’re getting a lot of work done today.
 
I know that you have a busy day ahead, and Jill and I are grateful to have a chance to talk to you today about our latest endeavor.  But we wanted to take a few minutes to talk with you about an issue that is important to both of us, as Jill said, and that’s mobilizing our country to support our military families.
 
As you know, all our men and women in uniform represent only 1 percent of the population, 1 percent of our country taking care of the needs of all of us.  And they shoulder the entire responsibility of defending our country.  They’re enduring tour after tour of duty, and they’re missing birthdays and holidays and all those daily moments with the people they love the most.
 
And these men and women aren’t the only ones who sacrifice for our country.  I said this when I appeared on Oprah, is that it’s very easy for us to recognize the men and women in uniform because they’re in uniform, but there are people who we don’t see who aren’t in uniform.  And the truth is those are the people who take care of them, and they’re their families.  Their families serve, too.
 
And over the last two years, Jill and I have spent a lot of time meeting with spouses who play the role of both parents for months on end.  If you think about the challenges your families face as you serve, which is how I came to this issue thinking about the challenges I face and then looking at a military spouse who is shouldering the exact same burden -- juggling play dates and carpools and doing their best to hide their own fears while answering questions from their kids about when mom or dad is coming home, enduring the grief and the heartbreak if they don’t return.
 
So the thing I had to think about is if I’m feeling sorry for myself in my role with all that I’m juggling, just imagine if I were in their position, with the pressures and the challenges and the uncertainty.  But they do it proudly.  And that’s the thing that we’ve learned.  That’s been one of the benefits of traveling around the country.  These families do not want our pity.  They do not want our sympathy.  They serve like their service members with pride, and they do it without complaint and they do it without regret.  And every day, these men and women and these children and these parents and these aunts and uncles, they show us what words like “service” and “strength” and “sacrifice” -- they show us what those words really look like.
 
So I think we can all agree, all of us, regardless of what our political positions may be, we can all agree that with everything these families do to take care of this country and all of us, America, we have an obligation to take care of them.  And that’s why last year my husband ordered a sweeping review of the entire federal government to see what the government is doing for these families and what the government could be doing better for these families.
 
And we gathered nearly 50 recommendations from Cabinet agencies for how we can improve services for our military families.  That includes everything from simplifying financial aid applications for these families, to increasing career opportunities for these spouses, to expanding childcare options for the children of service members.
 
And all of this is a very good start.  These are all very important steps, because our view is that we have to look internally before we can look outside.  But we know that the needs of our military families won’t be met simply by improving the way things work here in Washington.
 
So much of what these folks need are things that government can’t provide.  They need employers who are willing to hire them, even if they’re moving all across the country.  They need employers who understand the unique challenges that military spouses face.  They need schools that recognize the unique needs of kids who are facing multiple deployments.  They need to know those kids are in their classrooms.
 
They need communities that show gratitude for the sacrifices they’re making -- not just with words, but with deeds.  And not just once in a while, not just on Veterans Day or Memorial Day, but these communities need to rally around these families every single day.
 
And that’s why next month, Jill and I are going to be launching a campaign to rally this country around to support not just our troops, but their families.  And we’re focusing on four main areas:  employment, education, wellness and public awareness.
 
     And just to give you a sense of what we hope to do, I mean, if you look at what we’ve accomplished with “Let’s Move” just in one short year, our goal is to take that same model and make the conversation about our military families at the top of mind of every single one of us in this country.
 
     We’re going to be working with businesses and nonprofit organizations to improve career opportunities for veterans and military spouses.  There are a lot of wonderful models, companies that are already doing great things.  We want to raise up those models and encourage other businesses to find a way to do the same.
 
     We’re working with education groups to make schools more accommodating for military kids, and we’re going to be encouraging all Americans to simply step up as individuals, which the folks in this country are more than willing to do.  We care about our troops.  Oftentimes we just don’t know what to do.  And our hope is that through this public awareness campaign, we can funnel that energy, we can galvanize it, and we can direct it in a way that’s going to be most helpful for our military families.
 
     And that might mean something as simple as mowing the lawn for a family in your community or shoveling the snow.  When you talk to military families, these are the small things that make them feel appreciated without making them feel helpless.  Or offering military family discounts at local businesses, offering professional services -- whether someone is a lawyer or an accountant or a mechanic.  Whatever people do, that’s what we’re asking Americans -- find the thing that you do best and find a way to make that service something of importance and value to our military families.
 
     However folks choose to help, the idea here is very simple:  It’s about doing everything we can to keep military families in our hearts and on our minds.
 
     And this isn’t just about doing it in a time of war because once the war is over -- and hopefully that will happen -- the battles of military families and our troops continue.  The residual effects of deployments go on and on for a lifetime.  So this isn’t just a campaign for today.  This is a campaign for every day, all day.  This is going to outlive me and Jill and Joe and Barack.  This is something that should be a part of what we do here in America.
 
     And Jill -- as she said, that this is especially important when we talk about our National Guard servicemen and women who you all have special responsibility for right in your own states so you know their needs, you know their contributions.
 
     National Guard families, they face the same struggles as any other military family.  The difference is, is that these families often don’t live on bases or in communities with those built-in resources and support networks.  They are our neighbors.  We don’t even see them.  We don’t even know the challenges they face.  And oftentimes they’re living in communities where no one can relate to their experiences at all.  So it takes a special effort to reach out to these individuals and their families.  And that’s why we want to work with all of you -- the governors of our states and with people and organizations within your states -- to help us find ways to better support military families, to keep raising awareness and making these families an important part of all of our common agenda.
 
So we’re here because we want to hear from you.  If you have outstanding ideas -- shoot, if you have good ideas -- (laughter) -- or if there are groups in your states that you know are making a difference, we’re asking you to tell us about these.  Part of what Jill and I are going to continue to do is to travel the country and to use our platform, our ability to attract a little attention, and to shine a light on your states and the things that you do in an effort to provide these an example for the rest of the country for what they can do.
 
So we want to hear those ideas.  We want to hear from your staffs.  We want to put this information on serve.gov and find ways to better connect people looking for volunteer opportunities, looking for good ideas, finding a way for them to connect with you in your states.
 
Because in the end, this is something that I think we can all agree on, no matter where we come from, no matter what we might think about any other issue.  We all know that this issue -- this is not a Democrat issue, this is not a Republican issue.  This is an American issue.  And more importantly, this is an American obligation.  It truly is.
 
It’s about showing our gratitude to that very small group of Americans who make such a tremendous contribution and sacrifice to this country.  And it’s about serving the people who sacrifice so much to serve us.
 
One thing my husband says is that when he talks to troops and he goes out to wherever they’re stationed, that they don’t talk about themselves.  Never do they ask for anything for themselves.  They are our soldiers, they’re focused, but they always worry about what’s going on back at home.  That’s what keeps them not being able to focus on their mission -- not knowing that their wife, their children are being cared for; when they come back that they’ll be secure.  Those are the issues that our soldiers struggle with when they’re out on the battlefield.
 
So I know that this is something that we can do together.  And Jill and I, we didn’t come to this issue knowing that we were both passionate about this.  We were blessed to be put together and be able to join forces behind this one issue.  And we want the entire nation to feel like this is an obligation that we all can work on together.
 
So we’re going to need your help.  We’re going to need your support and encouragement to make this a reality.  We’re very excited about this initiative because we think that this will not only help our troops and their families, but it will help us as a nation link together and be even stronger.
 
So we’re excited.  We’re going to gear up.  We’re going to be working hard.  We’re going to on the road.  We’re going to make this fun and exciting.  We’re going to pull in businesses and entertainment and sports, and we’re going to pull in all sectors to get behind this effort.  And I know that people are more than ready to step up.  So if there is any way that you can helpful to us, if there are any suggestions that you can have for how we structure and talk about this issue so that it continues to be a bipartisan issue, we will gladly take those recommendations.  But I am looking for your leadership to make this happen, to make this a true success.  And if we do this we will have some grateful families behind us.  They’ve just been grateful to hear that this is a part of the national conversation.  They don’t even want much.  So I think because of that we can succeed.
 
So I want to thank you all for giving Jill and I your time.  I know your time is limited.  Things are tough in your states back home.  But I think even in this economy there are so many things we can do to keep this agenda in the forefront of all of our minds.
 
So thank you all in advance, and I look forward to visiting your states.  So you all take care and good luck.  (Applause.)
END
11:16 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 January 24, 2011
Remarks by the President, Mrs. Obama and Dr. Biden on the Presidential Studies Directive: Strengthening Our Military Families
East Room
 
  10:57 A.M. EST



    

DR. BIDEN:  Good morning.  And on behalf of the President and First Lady, the Vice President and myself, I want to welcome you and thank you for joining us here today at the White House.



I want to offer a special welcome to our service members and military families.  Your presence here today honors us all.



I’m proud to stand here this morning as a military mom.  My son is a captain in the Delaware Army National Guard and he recently spent a year in Iraq, so my husband and I know well the mixture of pride and concern that all military families share.   



From our earliest times together, Michelle and I have had the privilege of meeting with military service members and their families all around the country -- people and families like so many of you who are with us here today.



People like Jessica Sanders who I met at a deployment ceremony for members of the Delaware Army National Guard’s 126th Aviation Regiment.  Jessica’s fiancé, Captain Mark Thomas, will deploy in the coming weeks to Afghanistan where he and his unit will provide medical evacuations for troops, allies and Afghan civilians.  Captain Thomas’s parents are here today, too.  Thank you for your service.  (Applause.)  



People like Sandra Norris, the wife of Colonel John Norris, who I met when I traveled to Iraq last summer.  Sandra has volunteered thousands of hours of her time and expertise over the past 20 years –- leading family readiness groups and supporting other military families as an advisor and a friend -- all while raising two sons and coping with John’s 42 months in combat.



Each of you here today brings your own story of service, strength and sacrifice -- just like the many other military families we have been fortunate enough to meet.



Michelle and I have heard your concerns about schools and career issues.  We have shared your joy when your service members have returned from deployment.  And we have tried to offer solace when your soldiers have returned home injured.  And in each and every instance, we have been moved not just by your sacrifices, but by your incredible spirit and commitment to America.



Michelle and I have talked a lot about the ways that all Americans can support our troops and thank those men and women for their service.  Today, we will highlight the efforts of the federal government to support our nation’s military families.



At the direction of the President, the agencies are acting in a coordinated, strategic, and comprehensive way to bring the full force of the federal government to bear on this critically important issue.



As a teacher, I am particularly pleased that the Department of Education is supporting the military children in public schools throughout the country.  And I am looking forward to working with Secretary Duncan to help teachers understand how they can meet the unique needs of the military students in their classrooms.



I am also heartened by the efforts to respond to the challenges facing our Guard and Reserve families -- from helping them sustain their businesses to supporting their reintegration back into their communities after deployments.



Today is an important next step in this administration’s commitment to support our servicemen, their families and our members.



Michelle and I hold this commitment close in our hearts, just as we keep each of our soldiers in our hearts and in our prayers.  As long as we have the privilege and honor of serving in our roles, we will do whatever we can to support those who protect us.



And now it is my pleasure to introduce my partner, my dear friend, and our First Lady, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)



MRS. OBAMA:  Good morning.  Thank you.  Good morning, everyone.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  Thanks so much.  Thank you all.  Thank you for being here.  Thank you, Jill, for that kind introduction.  It has been a true privilege to work with you on these and so many other issues.  And we’ve got a lot more work to do, so I’m looking forward to it.



I also want to recognize all the members of the Cabinet, the elected officials, and all of the military family advocates that we have here with us today.  



And let me say a special word of thanks to folks like Patty Shinseki, Becky Gates, and all of the spouses of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the senior enlisted advisors who have been such good friends and trusted counselors to both Jill and me over these past couple of years.  



But most of all, I want to take a moment to thank those among us today and everyone outside of this room who wears our country’s uniform, and the families who serve right alongside them each and every day.  



Working with all of you is some of the best work I do.  Your stories affect me not just as First Lady, but as a mother, as a wife, and as an American.  Stories like that of the military wife, who has balanced raising a daughter, volunteering for her unit’s family readiness groups, and a career as a community developer, all while living in seven different states over 17 years.



Stories like the woman who had just gotten her nursing degree and quit her new job only after two months, so that she could take care of her Navy SEAL brother who was wounded by an IED -- two of my favorite people.  And today, he’s doing better, even running last fall’s Army 10-miler on a pair of prosthetic legs.  



Stories like the young woman, just 15 years old, who took on the role of a third parent -- helping her brothers and sisters with homework, assisting with meals -- as her mother cared for her wounded father.  She summed it all up by simply saying, “They needed me and I was there for them.”



Stories like these -- and stories like those of so many in this room -- are a reminder of what words like “service,” “strength,” and “sacrifice” -- what those words look like in real life.  They’re a reminder of the love that keeps us together -- the love of family, the love of country.  



And for me, and for Jill, they are a reminder of our obligation to our troops, our veterans, and their families -- an obligation to work harder; an obligation to channel the strength and courage of our military families and veterans into our work on their behalf.



Again, I know Jill feels the same way, and we’ve learned so much as we’ve tackled these issues together.  We visited with servicemen and women, like many of you, at Fort Bragg or Nellis Air Force Base in San Diego and New York, at Landstuhl and in Baghdad.  We’ve played with your kids at childcare centers.  We’ve sat with you at hospital bedsides.  We’ve heard your concerns around conference tables.  We’ve invited you to the White House for roundtable discussions and backyard picnics and even a Halloween haunted house or two.  (Laughter.)    



We’ve seen you giving back to your communities, no matter how strapped you are for time or resources or sleep.  We’ve heard how difficult it is when the only way you can connect with your spouse is by sporadic cell phone calls or emails.  We’ve seen the strength you’ve shown when a loved one comes home with a wounded body or painful memories, and the journey back to normal takes longer than expected.   



And the more we’ve listened, the more stories we’ve heard, the more we’ve recognized that there is no one, single definition of a military family; there’s no standard-issue set of challenges that you all face.  



The lives you lead, the families you build, the issues you confront are as diverse as anything seen throughout America.  You’re not just a military wife or a husband.  Maybe you’re a mom or a dad.  Maybe you, too, wear a uniform, or take care of a wounded warrior or a survivor to one of our fallen heroes.  



You’re starting your career, or looking to succeed in the one you already have.  You’re trying to save for college for your kids and retirement for yourselves.  You’re hoping to squeeze in that late night class and make it back in time for dinner.  You’re trying to save up for that down payment on the home and still afford the right daycare center for your kids.



And so, for me and for Jill, this isn’t about just understanding your concerns.  It’s about addressing your concerns.  It’s about telling your stories throughout the country, but more importantly, giving you a voice with decision-makers.  But most of all, it’s about getting something done.  It’s about making real, lasting changes that make a real difference in your lives.  



And that’s why today means so much to us.  That’s why we’re so excited.  Because back in May, I announced that my husband had directed his Cabinet to identify new priorities and new partnerships to support our military families.  So today, they have come back with 50 -- 50 specific commitments that aim to keep improving your quality of life.  



For instance, the Department of Education, as Jill mentioned, is simplifying its financial aid application process just for you.  The Departments of Labor, Commerce, Defense, and the Small Business Administration are partnering with the business community to expand your career options.  The Departments of Health and Human Services, Education, Agriculture, and Defense are working together to expand your childcare options.  



But the list of commitments goes on and on, addressing everything from homelessness to mental health to employment opportunities for young adults.  So this effort gives you all a seat at the table not just at the White House or at the Pentagon or at the VA.  It gives you a seat at the table all across the federal government.  



    And I want to emphasize that this is not a one-time press conference.  This isn’t just a headline for today that gets buried under tomorrow’s news.  These are lasting commitments by the government to address your needs and concerns for years to come.  And my hope is that these recommendations will live on no matter the President, no matter the party.  
 

So today isn’t the end of this process, not by a long shot. Don’t think for one minute that Jill and I will not keep pushing and advocating and fighting for you, because we will.  And we’re not going to stop until every part of our society -– every part, both inside and outside of government -– is fully mobilized to support our troops and their families.  After all the time I’ve spent with you, I know how much you deserve our government and our people’s support.  I know it because of your stories.  I know it because of what you’ve done for this country.  I know it because of that 15-year-old who answered the call, just because she was needed.   Some of the best memories I’ve had in the past couple of years are with you.  



And my husband feels the exact same way.  I know that because of the moments that we’ve shared with wounded warriors and survivors, because of the military children who have made us both smile, and because of the conversation that he and I have had long after those events are over.  That’s why he has been such a leader on these issues.  



And that is why I am so proud to introduce this man –- because he hears your stories not only as President and Commander-in-Chief, but also as a loving father and as a wonderful husband.  He doesn’t hear me say that often.  (Laughter.)  



So I give to you the President of the United States, Barack Obama.  (Applause.)  



THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, everybody.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.  Thank you very much.  Everyone, please have a seat.  Thank you so much.  
 
Well, good morning, everyone.  I want to thank Michelle and Jill -- although I have to say I hate following both of them.  (Laughter.)  As I think all you sense, when they speak, the government listens.  You should know -- and I know Joe Biden would agree with this -- when they speak, the President and Vice President listen.  (Laughter.)
 
So, Michelle and Jill, on behalf of all of us, thank you for being such extraordinary champions for our military families and making sure that their priorities are America’s priorities.
 
To all the members of Congress who are here, the members of my Cabinet, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, leaders from across the administration, and most of all, our troops, their families, their advocates -- thanks for joining us as we make an unprecedented commitment to America’s military families.
 
Now, last month I was in Afghanistan to visit our troops and to thank them for their service, especially during the holidays. And I think as some of you are aware, we fly in, in the dark of night for security reasons, unannounced.  Folks I'm sure have to scramble on the other end to make sure that our visit works.  And we had a wonderful crowd, a great rally.  And then afterwards, I took the time not only to meet with General Petraeus and some of the other commanding officers, but I also met with a group of our special ops forces.  Now, anybody who’s met with SEALs and Deltas, you know these are some of the toughest, most battle-hardened troops in our military.  They are involved in some of the most dangerous fighting that there is.
 
There are tough guys.  Looking at them, you can tell they’re tough.  Some folks end up being tough, but these -- you can just tell these guys are tough.  (Laughter.)  And they embody the courage and character that makes our military the finest in the world.  And just to give you some sense, these guys are going out on helicopter raids at night with very little support and carrying out extremely dangerous assignments each and every day.  
So I asked them.  I said, “What do you need from me?  What can I do to support you better?”  And without missing a beat, they looked me in the eye and they gave me their answer.  It wasn’t about more equipment.  It wasn’t about more resources on the battlefield.  In fact, it wasn’t about them.  They said -- to a man -- “Sir, take care of our families.  Take care of our families.  If we know our families are all right back home, then we can do our jobs.”
 
So we are here today because nearly a decade of war has been taking place, and our Armed Forces -- you and your families -- have done everything you’ve been asked to do.  You’ve been everything we could ask you to be.  You have done your duty.  And as a grateful nation, we must do ours.  We have to make sure that America is serving you as well as you have served us.  
 
This isn’t just a military or -- this is not just a moral obligation.  This is a matter of national security.  With millions of military spouses, parents and children sacrificing as well, the readiness of our Armed Forces depends on the readiness of our military families.
 
As Michelle mentioned, she and I see this in the spouses we meet.  During vacation, while we were in Hawaii, we had a chance to see a whole bunch of military families out on Kaneohe Marine Base.  And what was true then in the conversations we had is what we find wherever we go around the country -- truly heroic wives and husbands who become single parents on the home front and somehow keep it all together —- the house, the kids, maybe even a job of their own.  
 
We see it in the resilience of so many military kids -— boys and girls who, like all the other kids, are just trying to grow up, trying to find their way, but who, unlike other kids, are also having to worry about whether their mom or dad is going to come home safe.
 
We see it in the devotion of caregivers who tend to their loved ones, our wounded warriors, around the clock, day in, day out.  And we see it in the quiet pride of our veterans, who only ask that we live up to those words from President Lincoln, that as a nation, we truly care for all those who have “borne the battle.”  We see it in the unending love of the families of the fallen —- our Gold Star families who’ve given their nation the people they loved most in the world.
 
As Commander-in-Chief, I am determined to do everything in my power to make sure that we are fulfilling that request from our troops, that we are taking care of their families.  And that’s why, over the past two years, we’ve made major investments:  more military housing, more childcare, new schools for our military kids; more counseling and career support for spouses; more help for those tireless caregivers; dramatic increases in veterans health care, and helping hundreds of thousands of veterans and family members pursue their education through the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
 
And that’s why I ordered this government-wide effort, a Presidential Study Directive, to bring together the resources of the federal government for this mission.  Now, for those of you who aren’t familiar with these presidential directives, these are reserved for some of our most important and complex national security challenges.  I think Mike Mullen will share with you, since becoming President I’ve only ordered about a dozen, including this one, which we believe is the first one ever on behalf of military families.  
 
And today, I’m proud to announce that for the first time ever, supporting the well-being of our military families will be a priority not just for the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs, but all across the federal government.  That's why all these Cabinet folks are here today.  Sixteen members of my Cabinet have committed their departments and agencies to making military families one of their highest priorities.
 
We’re focusing on four areas —- the things you said matter most to you, whether you’re Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine or Coast Guard -- active Guard or Reserve, a veteran or a member of a family of the fallen.  We didn’t wait for today to launch these efforts.  Many of these efforts have already been underway.  And that includes innovative new partnerships so that, in tough fiscal times, our government is more efficient and serves you better.  
 
So let me just list our primary areas of focus.  First, we are putting new emphasis on the quality of life for our military families.  The Departments of Defense and Health and Human Services, for example, have joined forces to improve community mental health services and prevent suicides.  A new office in the Treasury Department is working to protect military families from abusive practices like predatory lending.  It turns out that military families are more subject to some of these financial scams than just about any other group.  
 
The Agricultural Department is expanding its support for families in rural areas.  A disproportionate number of our military families come from rural areas or are stationed in rural communities.  
 
The Interior Department -- we use our national parks to help our wounded warriors recover.  And we are going to remain relentless -- not just at VA, but at HUD and HHS and across the government -— in our fight to end homelessness among our veterans.  We have to have zero tolerance for homelessness among our veterans.  (Applause.)  
 
Second, we’re putting a new focus on the education and development of our military children, most of whom go to public schools.  So for the first time ever, the Department of Education will make military families a priority for some of its grant programs.  And that’s going to give states and communities new incentives to address the unique needs of military children.  
 
     The Interior Department, which is already one of the largest federal employers of young people, will create more opportunities, like summer jobs, for young people from military families.  And today, we are renewing our call for every state to adopt the Interstate Compact, which makes it easier for military children to transfer between schools and succeed in the classroom.  (Applause.)
 
Third, we’re redoubling our efforts to help military spouses pursue their educations and careers.  As Michelle said, we’ve brought in the departments of Labor and Commerce and the Small Business Administration.  We’re going to help spouses get that degree, find that job, or start that new business.  We want every company in America to know our military spouses and veterans have the skills and the dedication, and our nation is more competitive when we tap their incredible talents.  (Applause.)
 
And finally, we’re going to keep increasing childcare for our military moms and dads with young children.  This is not just a job for the Department of Defense.  As Michelle said, the departments of Education, Health and Human Services, and Agriculture are now helping, too.  And working together, we believe we can find new childcare options for tens of thousands of military children.
 
So these are just some of the nearly 50 specific commitments that my administration is making today.  In other words, we’re not simply reaffirming our responsibility to our military families, we are upping our game.  In fact, these 16 members of my Cabinet have signed their name to this report, pledging personally to see this through.  So, gang, you are all on the hook.  (Laughter.)  We know where to find you -- (applause) -- and not only to fulfill these commitments, but to make sure that as we go forward our military families are being heard across the government.  That's what we’re looking for here.  
 
Michelle and Jill said they’re going to keep pushing —- and I promise you they are not kidding.  (Laughter.)  And as President, I’m going to make sure that we get this done.
 
We also recognize that this can’t be a mission for government alone.  Government has its responsibilities, but 1 percent of Americans may be fighting our wars; 100 percent of Americans need to be supporting our troops and their families -- 100 percent.  (Applause.)  
 
So to help launch this effort, Michelle will be on “Oprah” this week to urge --
 
MRS. OBAMA:  Oooh!  (Laughter and applause.)
 
THE PRESIDENT:  -- to urge every American to join a new national campaign to support our military families.  That's a pretty good plug.
 
You see, this is one of those challenges, and one of those moments, when we have to remember what unites us as Americans, what we can achieve together -- and what we owe to each other, especially to those who serve and sacrifice so we can live free and be safe.
 
I want every service member who’s deployed to know that when you’re over there taking care of the country that you love, your country is back here taking care of the families that you love.  I want every military wife and husband to know that we’re going to help you keep your family strong and secure.  I want every military kid to know that we’re going to be there for you, too, to help you grow and to live your dreams.
 
I want our Gold Star families to know that this nation will never forget and will always honor the supreme sacrifice that your family has made to our nation.  
 
And I want every single American to remember that as the beneficiaries of their service, each of us has an obligation —- a sacred duty —- to care for those who have “borne the battle.”   
 
These are my commitments; these are Michelle and Jill’s commitments; these are my administration’s commitments; and they must be America’s commitments.  And as long as I am President, we’re going to keep working to fulfill those commitments for all who serve.  
 
Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.  (Applause.)
  END
11:29 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 13, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden to the U.S. Forces-Iraq Troops
5:50 p.m. Arabian Standard Time
 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Task Force Troy, Task Force 807 Med, Task Force Phantom, USDC, I just want to say I am amazed you’re still here.  (Laughter.)  And I don't mean in Iraq.  I mean, this is my seventh trip since Vice President, my 17th or 18th here, and I can tell you four of those seven trips since I was Vice President my son was here, and I assure you he would not have waited for me.  (Laughter.)  And so thank you very, very much.  
 
I truly, truly apologize for keeping you waiting so long.  It’s all the general’s fault.  (Laughter.)  Actually, it’s all my fault, but I think we made some good progress today with all of the Iraqi leadership.
 
We met, and folks, the point I want to make to you is very simple.  I’m here to say thank you.  I’m here to say thank you from the bottom of my heart and for -- and to thank all of your families.  
 
You know, there’s an old expression that is attributable to John Milton.  He said, “They also serve who only stand and wait.”  And your families, your families have made incredible sacrifices for you to be able to be here to promote the interests of the United States of America.  
 
You know, Iraq has made, in large part because of some of you -- this is more than your first tour, I know -- but for literally the hundreds of thousands of troops, over a million of troops have rolled through here.  Because of the incredible sacrifices that have been made since we arrived here, the Iraqi people for the first time, I suspect, I would argue, in their history, on the verge of literally creating a country that will be democratic, sustainable and, God willing, prosperous -- that it could have a dramatic impact on this entire region.  And God knows the Iraqi people deserve it.
 
But do you know, when we came to office, the President said that we were going to end this war and we’re going to end it responsibly.  By that we meant we were going to end it by bringing you all home within a time certain, but leaving behind a country that was worthy of the sacrifices that so many of your brothers and sisters have made.
 
Nearly 32,000 of your colleagues have been wounded here in this country; 4,422 fallen angels.  The good news is every time I ride home now I’m not riding home with a coffin strapped to the floor of the aircraft as we take off here.  
 
And I want you to know, though, everybody talks about essentially the war is over.  You’re still risking your lives for your country.  You lost some of your comrades, some of our brave American soldiers, just a couple of days ago.  And so I want you to know, the President wants you to know that this is not the normal day in the office for most Americans.
 
And look, the things that you are doing now in this transition period are the things that are going to put the Iraqi people, the Iraqi government in a position to maybe able to sustain the incredibly hard-fought gains that you initially were responsible for.  
 
You have trained, you have trained the Iraqi forces to the point now where they can be in the lead, and they’re getting better and better every day.  They’re going to continue to need our assistance and your assistance for some time.  
 
But the fact of the matter is that there's a lot that is changing during this transition.  Our mission has now fundamentally shifted since September.  But it’s going to shift again at the end of 2011.  We will probably be in the position of still maintaining and giving support.  We will probably be in the position of still -- in certain specific areas, having to train and equip.
 
But you know, what you’re doing now is -- what most Americans don’t realize is that each of you and your task forces are doing different things.  The 807 Med, you’re not only taking care of over the 100 bases and facilities we have around this country and America, but you’re literally providing the beginning of an infrastructure for a country to be able to deliver health care, to be able to deliver quality health care.  And so you’re leaving a legacy, a legacy of not just having helped freed a country, but helped getting the country on its feet and put in motion something that you will be proud, when you’re grandparents, to look at and see that this country is taking care of the basic needs of their country, and know you played a part in that.
 
You know, when you talk about your families, there is a -- I’ve been quoted in the last couple of years because I say it so often -- we really have one, one, only one sacred obligation as a nation.  We have many obligations, but only one truly sacred obligation, and that's to prepare and equip those who we send into harm’s way, and care for them when they come home.
 
There are thousands, close to 17,000, of your comrades that have come home who are going to need extended care the rest of their lives.  I visit veterans’ hospitals, I visit Army hospitals, I visit hospitals every single place I go.  You all know some of your friends are in Brooke Army Medical Center at their burn center.  The price that some of these kids, these people, have paid is beyond, beyond anything anyone should have to ever contemplate.
 
I spend -- and I don't say this like I -- my wife and I, though, spend every Christmas in Walter Reed visiting every non-ambulatory patient in that hospital and their families.  And the thing that amazes me -- the thing that amazes me about you all is no matter where I go in these hospitals, I always ask the family that's there or the soldier, sailor, Marine, Airman that's there who is the one injured, “What can I do for you?”  And almost without exception, the only request I ever get is, “Mr. Vice President, can you help me get back to my unit?
 
I just think -- you know, we talk about you all being, and you are, the greatest warrior class that the world has ever created.  This is not only the best run, but this is the most powerful, significant military force in the history of mankind.  
 
And the world knows that and our citizens know that, but I wish they knew, I wish they knew and could see what I see every single day.  I wish they could see all these young women and men, and not-so-young sometimes, who don't ask a thing for all that they’ve done, and you wonder how in God’s name can they do this.
 
Whether I was in Bosnia where we didn’t have as many casualties, or in Iraq where -- or Afghanistan where I just came from, or here, it’s the same story.  You are part of an incredibly, incredibly proud tradition.
 
And I hope that not only your military expertise wears off on our Iraqi friends, but I hope that they understand and see -- and I think they do -- the incredible patriotism, the incredible dedication to the country, the incredible diversity that we represent, men and women, black and white, Asian, Caucasian, every single mix that exists on the Earth, working this one incredible unit to protect the interests of the United States.
 
So I apologize -- I didn’t plan on getting emotional -- but I apologize for having kept you waiting, but I do not apologize for the intensity of the feeling that I and so many more Americans have for the sacrifices you and your comrades have made for your country.  
 
I'll end where I began.  We owe you.  We owe you more than we could ever repay you.  But the amazing thing to me is how after all that you’ve done, so few of you expect anything, even thanks.  
 
But the big difference between my generation and the general’s -- and I’m older than he is -- who leave their home, who leave their home, as you’ve noticed, and some of you leave home and come back, people have a sense and they know what you’ve done.  I hope you know how much they appreciate it.  
 
And I just was recently up in 10th Mountain up in Fort Drum, New York up in Watertown.  Any of you who are from that way, you’re not missing a thing.  They just had 44 inches of snow.  (Laughter.)  But I look at the expressions and the faces of the families as you all come back, and I hope, when you re-deploy home, I hope you get as much -- appreciate as much the sense of joy and overwhelming thanks that your families and your country feels, as my wife and I felt when our son came home.  
 
So folks, you’re led by one of the truly great generals in the United States military, and that's not hyperbole, and I mean that literally.  And it’s obvious that his enthusiasm for his country and his troops has worn off on all of you guys.  Otherwise there's no possibility you’d wait an hour on a marble floor to hear a Vice President of the United States of America.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you.  I look forward, if you’re willing, to coming out there and shaking as many of your hands as I can to personally tell you thanks.  God bless you all.  (Applause.)
END
6:01 P.M. Arabian Standard Time
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  January 12, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Prime Minister Gilani of Pakistan
Islamabad, Pakistan
5:04 P.M. Pakistan Standard Time

PRIME MINISTER GILANI:  Mr. Vice President, it gives me immense pleasure to once again welcome you to Pakistan.  We regard you as a good friend and appreciate your important contribution to reviewing the friendship and partnership between the United States and Pakistan.

VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.

PRIME MINISTER GILANI:  Pakistan and United States have been on the same side for over half a century and at all defining periods of contemporary history.  Our friendship and partnership is based on shared values.

Vice President Biden, your visit has provided us a good opportunity to exchange views on bilateral and regional issues.  We had very fruitful discussions.  Pakistan looks forward with confidence of a robust, enduring and mutually beneficial partnership with the United States.  Policy consultations and coordination are necessary for attaining a shared cause.  We value United States’ support for Pakistan’s economy, stability and security.  We have set ourselves a calendar of extensive engagements during 2011.  Comprehensive engagements at all plans is important.

I’m happy to note that our enhanced strategic dialogue process is now in place.  We are determined to utilize this and other mechanisms to give greater substance and strength to our relations.

I must add that our discussion today on combating terror, issues of regional stability and promoting reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan were extremely useful.  Mr. Vice President, I assure you that we intend to work practical solutions and answers to many difficult issues.  


Please convey our warm greetings to President Obama and the friendly people of United States.  Thank you very much.

VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.  And it’s an honor to be back here, and I want to thank you and your colleagues for your hospitality.  I took so much of your time, and we talked about so many things in detail that you’re probably very tired, but I found it extremely useful, and I thank you very much.

I also had a chance to meet with President Zardari today, and I’m going from here -- as a matter of fact I’m late -- I’m going from here to meet with General Kayani later this afternoon.  

Although it’s been almost two years since I have been back to Islamabad -- two years this month as a matter of fact -- I’ve had the occasion and it’s been my great honor to host you as well as the President in both my home and my office, and I look forward to seeing you again soon.  And I tell you that we have had numerous telephone conversations, and I thank you for always taking my call, and I thank you for your input.

I have been privileged in my career in United States Senate and as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee to have a long relationship with Pakistani leaders, going all the way back to the early ‘70s.  And our relationship, in my view and the view of President Obama, is absolutely vital, absolutely vital to U.S. interests, and I believe you believe it is to Pakistani interests, as well.

That's why I’m here.  This is why it’s the first overseas trip of the New Year.  And I can tell you President Obama sends his regards and is looking forward later this year to make a trip to Islamabad, as well.

The President and I -- indeed, the entire world, I would suggest -- were saddened, saddened by the cold-blooded murder of a decent, brave man.  The governor was killed simply because he was a voice for tolerance and understanding.  To state the obvious, there is no justification, none, for such senseless acts.

As you know all too well and all students of history know, as we’ve seen throughout history, societies that tolerate such actions end up being consumed by those actions.  So please accept my deepest condolences and those of President Obama and those of the American people.



The United States and Pakistan have forged an enduring partnership, as you referenced, Mr. Prime Minister, against extreme ideologies; a partnership based, as you pointed out, on our common interests and our mutual respect for one another.

And because we so value that partnership, I think it’s important to not only our leaders, as we talked -- as I talked about, understand one another, but that our populations understand one another, the leadership of each of our respective countries, the motives and the intentions, and avoid misconceptions about each of our motives or intentions.

That's why we in the United States and this administration pays close attention to what Pakistanis believe about the United States and U.S. intentions as it relates to Pakistan.  We read your newspaper, and to some of the columnists out here, we read you, columnists, as well.  We watch your television programs, as you do ours.  And we -- and I personally -- meet with Pakistanis from all walks of life.  And I am privileged to have close relationships with the Pakistani American communities, which is very well organized; close relationships for the past 30 years.

So I would like to take this opportunity to address directly what I believe are some misconceptions about U.S. actions and even more importantly about U.S. intentions with regard to our partner, Pakistan.

We know that there are those -- I’m not talking about the leadership; I’m talking about in the public discourse -- those who believe that in America’s fight against al Qaeda, that we have imposed a war upon Pakistan.  But violence -- violent extremists are a threat not just to the United States but to Pakistan, as well, and indeed to the entire civilized world.

The fact is that al Qaeda plotted an attack that killed nearly 3,000 American citizens.  And they continue to plot attacks against the United States and our interests to this very day.  And they have, not with your help, but they have found refuge in some of the most remote portions of your country.

As Pakistanis have wondered whether or not we are part of the problem instead of the solution, al Qaeda has worked with extremist allies who have had you as a target and your people as a target, maiming and murdering thousands of Pakistani security forces and ordinary citizens, as you saw so clearly in Swat and other parts of your country.

There are those also who accuse the United States of violating your sovereignty as we support your army and pursue terrorists where they hide.  I know well over the past 30 years the proud, proud traditions of the Pakistani military and its capacity to defend and protect Pakistan.  But I would respectfully suggest that it’s the extremists who violate Pakistan’s sovereignty and corrupt its good name.  Our goal is to work with your leaders and you, Mr. Prime Minister, to restore and strengthen sovereignties in those areas of your country where extremists have violated it.

There are even some critics in Pakistani society and elsewhere that suggest that America disrespects Islam and its followers.  I would like to take some of you to Los Angeles to one of the largest mosques in the world, where Muslim Americans practice their religion in full view and with respect of all Americans.

The assertion that we disrespect Islam is actually quite the opposite.  Islam is the fastest growing religion in the United States of America.  And as President Obama said in the heart of Cairo, one of the world’s great Muslim-majority cities, and I quote, “Islam is part of America.  And I believe” -- continuing the quote, he said, “I believe America holds within her the truth that regardless of race, religion or station in life, all of us share common aspirations -- to live in peace and security, to get education, to work with dignity, to love our families, our communities, and our God.”

To those who make these charges against us, I would challenge them to name any other country in the world, any country in the world, who -- where those of all faiths enjoy greater freedom of worship than they do in the United States of America.  Name me a single country in the world.  

So I want to put to rest, which I know I will not by this simple assertion -- we are not, we are not the enemies of Islam, and we embrace those who practice that great religion in our country.

There are also those who believe that our policies favor India and seek to weaken -- I’ve even heard some right -- and say to even dismantle this great country.  You know and your colleagues know that is dead wrong.  We want what you want:  a strong, stable, prosperous democratic Pakistan at peace with itself and with its neighbors, including India.  We want that not just for your sake but we wish your success because it’s in our own interest.  It’s in the interest of the entire region and I would argue the entire world.

America admires, admires the vision of your great founder, who said wisely, and I quote, “Our object should be peace within, and peace without.  We want to live peacefully and maintain cordial and friendly relations with our immediate neighbors and with the world at large.”  End of quote.  President Obama and I and everyone in our administration shares that vision.  

There's one last misconception I'd like to address, and I’m not suggesting these misconceptions are held or shared by anyone in this government, but we read them, we listen to them, we watch them on your television.

The one last misconception I'd like to address is there are those who point to America’s history in this region and claim that eventually we will abandon Pakistan; we will no longer be concerned.  But I have learned and we have learned from the past that only a productive way forward -- the only productive way forward is a long-term enduring partnership.

As I said two years ago when I was here -- and some of you covered me -- as I said four years ago when I came with Senator Kerry and others, and I said before that, our nations must move from what unfortunately for several decades was a transactional relationship to a true partnership, a sustained partnership.  

That's why we’ve established in Pakistan our largest educational exchange, and English-language program, in the entire world, a long-term investment in the dynamism of your young people.

A growing number, a growing number of Pakistani Americans, Americans of Pakistani descent, play an increasingly, increasingly visible role in bridging our societies and building those enduring partnerships.

I hope you will acknowledge we have demonstrated -- I say this to the press -- we have demonstrated by our actions over the last several years we mean what we say.

Through our Strategic Dialogue, as you pointed out, we’ve begun to implement projects that will benefit the people of Pakistan, in areas ranging from energy to agriculture to communications.  This means that you will soon see more dams providing more electricity and irrigation; crop yields that are higher; more hospitals providing services to the people of Pakistan, among other tangible benefits.  

Through what used to be called the Biden-Lugar bill -- now the Kerry-Lugar-Berman legislation -- we committed $7.5 billion, in very difficult economic times for us, as well as you and the rest of the world, in civilian assistance over the next five years.  There has been talk, and it’s true, that it took a while to get going.  But it is moving, and we will keep the entire commitment.

Rather than dictate to Pakistan how this money should be spent, we’re partnering with the government to achieve your priorities to lay a foundation for a sustainable long-term economic growth for this great country.

We’ve increased security cooperation between our two militaries, including training, support for operations, and greater coordination among -- along the border in Afghanistan.  And we’ve stood shoulder to shoulder with the Pakistani people during the last summer’s devastating, amazingly devastating, floods, deploying troops, airlift support, relief supplies to the affected regions as quickly as we possibly could.  Our only regret is we could not do more, more quickly with more resources.  I know the work is not yet done with regard to the floods, and that your government, Mr. Prime Minister, faces very difficult choices in addressing the cost of rebuilding.  

And we have made a long-term commitment to assist with the reconstruction and recovery, as evidenced by our announcement last week of another $190 million in Watan -- I’m hoping I’m pronouncing it correctly -- Watan cards.

And by the way, I don’t say this to say -- for you to suggest that you owe us any debt or gratitude.  It’s what partners do for partners.  It’s what should be done.  It’s in our interest to help you beyond it being the right thing to do.

These are just some of the many initiatives underway that are strengthening our partnership and helping to forge a more secure and, God willing, more prosperous Pakistan.

Let me leave you all with this final thought.  My country’s aspirations for Pakistan largely mirror yours, Mr. Prime Minister, and the rest of the Pakistani people.  

When my grandchildren and their grandchildren read news from Pakistan, I don't want them to find articles about terrorism, poverty, political instability, lack of American support.  I want them to be able to focus on the great Pakistani scientist winning Nobel Peace Prizes -- or excuse me, Nobel Prizes for Science.  I want the focus -- them to focus on entrepreneurs founding global businesses that you have.  I want them to focus on the artists creating masterpieces.  I want them to focus on the brilliance of your culture and the incredible resources, human resources, of your country.

As we embark on this New Year, Mr. Prime Minister, we must, in my view and the President’s view, rededicate ourselves to building on the progress we have made in the last couple years and what still must be achieved together.  

Again, I'll end where I began.  A close partnership with Pakistan and its people is in the vital self-interest of the United States of America and, I would argue, although it’s for you to decide, in the vital self-interest of Pakistan, as well.  

The discussions we had today, Mr. Prime Minister, as you aptly stated, are an important, an important step of the many we’ve taken so far toward that end.  My hope is, God willing, if I’m able to stand here next year with you, that we will be able to point to greater progress, greater resolve and more, more economic prosperity for both your people and mine.  And again, I thank you all and your folks for taking so much time with me.  

And I apologize, but I am late for my meeting with General Kayani, and I am never late for generals.  Thank you very much.  

END
5:24 P.M. Pakistan Standard Time
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 January 11, 2011
Remarks by Vice President Biden and President Karzai of Afghanistan After Meeting
3:02 P.M. Afghanistan Time

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  (As Translated) Good afternoon.  Members of the media, Afghan media and international media, in the name of the God, I’m delighted and honored today to welcome His Excellency Joe Biden, Vice President of the United States.

      This is the fourth or fifth -- his visit -- to Afghanistan.  His first visit was at the very beginning of Afghanistan’s interim administration, where we met in a very cold room.  There was no electricity, nothing.  But because of his help and their assistance, we have electricity and everything today.  So today we had all the things, and we are in a lot improved situation for which we are grateful to their contributions.

      Today, His Excellency Joe Biden, me -- (inaudible) --and met in presence of our delegations.  We had a working lunch, and we spoke on many issues, including on several issues of mutual importance to both the countries.  And then it was followed by a one-to-one meeting that lasted for over an hour and which was also centered on the strategic partnership between Afghanistan and the United States; security in Afghanistan and in the region, as well as the transition process of security responsibilities to Afghan forces; on ways how to intensify and how to do that process and transition in the best possible manner.

      So we had discussions, and I’m pleased of the conclusions and of the results of our meetings, and I once again welcome him to Afghanistan.  And I thank you for all the cooperation and for all the contributions that you have given to the people of Afghanistan.

      Thank you, Mr. Vice President.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. President, thank you.  It’s a delight to be back.  Let me start by thanking you and your team for the great hospitality that you’ve extended to me and my crew I brought from Washington.  I know you know you get to see General Petraeus and Ambassador Eikenberry frequently, but it’s not as often as I get to come and visit you.  

      You know, the President reminisced very briefly on the telephone -- I guess it was a week ago or 10 days ago -- and again today about the first time I was here in Kabul nine years ago this month, as a matter of fact, and after the Taliban had been driven out, just when you were moving into the palace.  And it was under a very, very difficult circumstance that the President was taking over, and I witnessed that legendary hospitality with which the Afghans are so well known.  I really mean that.  There was no heat.  There was very little electricity that kept going on and off.  There was no paid staff --

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  Yes.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  And yet you treated me as if I were an honored guest and that you had --

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  You were, you were.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  The hospitality, the food, the dinner, it was exceptional, and I kept thinking, Mr. Ambassador, “My Lord, how is he able to do this?”  (Laughter.)

      But I also want to point out and pay tribute to not just your leadership, Mr. President, but in those days, in the circumstances, people forget is the extraordinary personal courage, physical courage, you showed.  It is -- it was notable then and it’s worth noting now.  And that's why I am pleased to -- was pleased to have President Karzai as a guest in my home in Washington on two different occasions.  And both times I apologized to him because it wasn’t nearly as lavish and wasn’t nearly as significant, but it was an opportunity to return the hospitality.  And I look forward, Mr. President, to being able to do that again.

      When I was last in Afghanistan just before our administration took office -- it was two years ago this month, and President-elect Obama asked me, as you recall, Mr. President, to once again get a firsthand look and have a discussion with you.  And now since then we have with the leadership of my -- the team that's here on the right, the President’s team, we have a strategy and the resources in place to accomplish the goal of a stable and growing and independent Afghanistan able to provide for its own security, and in the process to be able to, at the same time, to disrupt and dismantle and defeat ultimately al Qaeda in Pakistan and the little appearance there is in Afghanistan.

      A stable, sovereign Afghanistan that is not a haven for terrorists is critical toward that goal.  And to that end we’re engaged in working -- and I had the opportunity to go to a training facility today -- working with your military to train up a first-class military organization that will be eventually in the position to meet all of the Afghan security needs.  And toward that end I'd like to thank your Minister of Defense for taking me on the tour earlier today.

      In the meantime our military is breaking the momentum of the insurgents and the radicalized portion of the Taliban.  Our diplomats are working hard along with the President to promote regional cooperation, including with your neighbor, Pakistan.

      And I want to recognize the contribution toward this effort over the past several years of a significant American diplomat who passed away, Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, who had unparalleled skills and tenacity that -- where he spent almost two years as our special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan before he passed away last month.

      And over the past two years the United States has sent some of America’s most capable troops into enclaves where -- that have long been operated -- the insurgency and the Taliban of being able to operate with impunity.  And we’ve also substantially increased our civilian effort here in Afghanistan with diplomats and development experts side by side with our military and your soldiers and your police and your personnel, Mr. President.  And as a result, I think it’s fair to say we have largely arrested the Taliban momentum here in some very important areas, particularly in Helmand and Kandahar.

      But these gains, as you pointed out to me, Mr. President, as we know, are fragile and reversible.  And as the President knows, sustaining them is going to require the Afghans to assume the responsibility for security and governance.  And it’s going to require more pressure -- more pressure on the Taliban, from Pakistan’s side of the border, than we’ve been -- we’ve been able to exert so far.  And there are many hard days that lie ahead.

      But we know that in order to maintain the support and commitment of the people of Afghanistan and the American people, we must work with our Afghan partners to improve the provision of basic services, to promote transparency and accountability, to strengthen the institutions, and advance the efforts of reconciliation with the Taliban of which we spoke for some time; the Taliban who’ve rejected Al Qaeda and renounce violence and are prepared to embrace the Afghan constitution.

      None of this, as the President has pointed out to me and we have discussed and we know, is going to be easy. But, Mr. President, in concert with your government and our NATO allies, we now have a viable path outline to move forward.  And again, I'd like to compliment you publicly on Lisbon.  I think it was a very, very useful conference, and I think we’re finally all on the same page.

      And this year, NATO is going to begin to transition responsibility over the security in certain provinces to the government of Afghanistan, while the United States begins a condition-based reduction of our forces starting in July.  And all of this will advance our shared U.S.-Afghani objective of having an Afghan National Security Force in the lead throughout all of Afghanistan by 2014, as President Karzai wisely proposed -- there was a first to move forward on.

      Together, we will work on a framework for future bilateral relations and a lasting friendship with the Afghan people and the American people.  And going forward, we’ll continue to train and advise the forces and to provide civilian assistance.

      Let me say it plainly, Mr. President, it is not our intention to govern or to nation-build.  As President Karzai often points out, this is the responsibility of the Afghan people, and they are fully capable of it.  As President Obama said it in a slightly different way, he said, “It’s Afghans who must secure their country.  And it’s Afghans who must build their nation.”  And we stand ready to help you in that effort.  And we will continue to stand ready to help you in that effort after 2014.

      PRESDIENT KARZAI:  Wonderful.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  We have moved into a new phase -- a new phase -- in Afghanistan; a transition to a full Afghan lead that begins this year and will conclude in 2014, as we prepare a framework for our future bilateral relations.  This is President Obama’s vision for the future.  It’s a vision expressed by our allies at the Lisbon Conference.  And I believe, based on our conversation today, it clearly reflects the vision of President Karzai.

      The United States, if the Afghan people want it, are prepared, and we are not leaving in 2014.  Hopefully we will have totally turned over the ability of the -- to the Afghan security forces to maintain the security in the country, but we will -- we are not leaving, if you don't want us to leave.  And we plan on continuing to work with you, and it’s in the mutual self-interest of both our nations.

      And so, Mr. President, again, I want to thank you for a very, very good conversation.  And I look forward to seeing you and returning the hospitality in Washington. Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, gentlemen.  I appreciate it.

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  Vice President, are we taking questions or are we not taking --

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, they tell me in order for me to get to where I’m supposed to go to Forward Operating Base --

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  Let’s go and talk.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  If I don’t leave now, I don’t get back because it --

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  You will have a chance some other time.  Today the Vice President has to leave in a hurry because we spent a lot of time doing other things.  So he has to go and greet the soldiers.

      VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I apologize.  Thank you.

      PRESIDENT KARZAI:  Next time.             

                   END          3:14 P.M. Afghanistan Time
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
HOME WEEKLY ADDRESS
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 December 04, 2010
Weekly Address: Vice President Biden Calls on Congress to Preserve the Middle Class Tax Cuts and to Extend Unemployment Insurance This Year
With President Obama visiting troops in Afghanistan, Vice President Biden says Congress must extend both the middle class tax cuts and unemployment insurance for the sake of those families and the broader economy.
<a href="https://www. -nocookie.com/embed/DENgDfAj4b8?wmode=opaque&amp;showinfo=0&amp;autohide=1&amp;iv_load_policy=3">Embedded video for Weekly Address: Vice President Biden Calls on Congress to Preserve the Middle Class Tax Cuts and to Extend Unemployment Insurance This Year</a>
MP4MP3
WASHINGTON – With President Obama visiting troops in Afghanistan, Vice President Biden delivered this week’s address, in which he said Congress must extend both the middle class tax cuts and unemployment insurance this year.  The combined economic blow of raising taxes on the middle class and cutting two million Americans off of unemployment insurance would wind up costing the country hundreds of thousands of jobs.  And, to say that during these challenging times, we cannot afford to provide a lifeline to millions of Americans, but we can afford to give tax cuts to the wealthiest two percent is not just bad economic policy, it is also wrong.
 
The audio and video will be available at 6:00am EST Saturday, December 4, 2010 at obamawhitehouse.archives.gov.
Remarks of Vice President Joe Biden
As Prepared for Delivery
Weekly Address
December 4, 2010
Hi, this is Joe Biden.  I’m filling in for President Obama this weekend because he’s on his way back from Afghanistan, where he was spending some time with the brave men and women of our Armed Forces.
 
It’s tough to be far from home during the holidays, especially in a warzone, so he wanted to be there in person to thank them on behalf of all Americans for their service and the sacrifice each one of them are making.  And here at home, the First Lady and my wife Jill have made supporting military families a priority.  These families are also making difficult sacrifices for our country, and they deserve our admiration and gratitude as well.
 
Our service members and their families are always on our mind, even as the President and I are working on other issues that all American families are deeply concerned about: accelerating our recovery, growing our economy, strengthening our middle class, and getting our friends and neighbors back to work.
 
In recent months, we’ve seen encouraging signs on that front.  After shrinking for four straight quarters, our economy has now grown five straight quarters.  After nearly two years of job loss, our economy has created more than one million private sector jobs just this year.  
 
And after teetering on the brink of liquidation last year, our auto industry is posting healthy gains, assembly lines are running again, and American manufacturing is getting up off the mat and fighting its way back.
 
Still, Friday’s jobs report was a sobering reminder of that. While we saw another month of job growth in November, it just wasn’t enough.
 
That underscores why it’s so important to get going without delay on two things that will have the most impact in growing the economy.
 
One: we’ve got to extend the tax cuts for the middle class that are set to expire at the end of the month.  If we don’t, millions of middle-class families will see a big bite out of their paychecks starting January 1.  And that’s the last thing we should let happen.  After a decade in which they lost ground, middle class families can ill-afford a tax hike – and our economy can’t afford the hit it will take if middle class families have less money to spend.
 
And the second thing we’ve got to do is extend unemployment insurance for Americans who have lost their jobs in a tough economy.  Without unemployment benefits, families can’t spend on basic necessities that are grown, made, and sold by other Americans.
 
Together, the economic hit caused by raising taxes on the middle class, and denying two million Americans unemployment insurance, will wind up costing us hundreds of thousands of more jobs.  It just isn’t smart.
 
And, cutting unemployment insurance is not only not smart, it’s not right either.  It would mean telling millions of our neighbors who are out of work today through no fault of their own, that they’re on their own.
 
That’s no message to send in the season of hope.  We all know someone who’s hit a rough patch.  When that happens in America, we help him get back up on his feet.  That’s who we are.  That’s the American way.
 
So I just don’t agree with the folks who’ve said we can’t afford a lifeline for Americans who lost their jobs during the worst recession in generations, but we can afford to borrow hundreds of billions of dollars to extend tax cuts for the wealthiest two percent of Americans.  That’s bad economic policy, and it’s also just simply wrong.
 
Congress must extend these needed unemployment benefits before it goes home for the year.  And it must bolster economic growth by preserving tax cuts for our middle class.  I’m glad that the House of Representatives voted to do that this week, and I call on the United States Senate to do the same.
 
Look, there’s no doubt these are tough times.  But we are slowly but surely fighting our way back, moving forward.  And we’re going to keep fighting – to grow this economy, to strengthen our middle class, and to restore the American Dream.  That’s my pledge to you.
 
And hey, one last thing – since the President will be back to record this message next week, let me take this chance to say from my family to yours: Merry Christmas, Happy Hanukkah, have a great Holiday season and an even better New Year.  
 
Thanks, and enjoy the weekend.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 December 04, 2010
MENSAJE SEMANAL: Vicepresidente Biden hace un llamado al Congreso para que mantenga los recortes tributarios para la clase media y que extienda los beneficios por desempleo este año
WASHINGTON – Debido a la visita del Presidente Obama a las tropas en Afganistán, el Vicepresidente Biden pronunció el mensaje de esta semana, en el que dijo que el Congreso debe extender los recortes tributarios para la clase media y los beneficios por desempleo este año. Los efectos combinados del aumento de impuestos para la clase media y dejar de pagarles a dos millones de estadounidense los beneficios por desempleo podrían costarle al país cientos de miles de empleos. Y decir que durante estos tiempos difíciles no podemos darnos el lujo de auxiliar a millones de estadounidenses, pero que sí podemos darnos el lujo de otorgarles recortes tributarios al dos por ciento más rico de la población, no solo es mala política económica, sino también injusto.
El audio y el video estarán disponibles a las 6:00am EST del sábado, 4 de diciembre, 2010 en obamawhitehouse.archives.gov.

 
Declaraciones del Vicepresidente Joe Biden
Versión preparada
Mensaje semanal
4 de diciembre, 2010

 
Los saluda Joe Biden. Estoy hablándoles en lugar del Presidente Obama esta semana porque él se encuentra camino de regreso de Afganistán, donde ha pasado tiempo con los valientes hombres y mujeres de nuestras Fuerzas Armadas.
 
Es difícil estar lejos de casa durante las fiestas, especialmente en zona de guerra, de modo que él quería visitarlos en persona para agradecerles a nombre de todos los estadounidenses por los servicios y sacrificios que hace cada uno de ellos. Y aquí en casa, la Primera Dama y mi esposa Jill le han dado prioridad a respaldar a las familias militares. Estas familias también están haciendo difíciles sacrificios por nuestro país y también merecen nuestra admiración y gratitud.
 
Los miembros de nuestras Fuerzas Armadas y sus familiares siempre están en nuestros pensamientos, incluso cuando el Presidente y yo estamos trabajando en otros asuntos que les conciernen a todas las familias estadounidenses: la aceleración de nuestra recuperación, el crecimiento de nuestra economía, el fortalecimiento de nuestra clase media y hacer que nuestros amigos y vecinos vuelvan a trabajar.
En los últimos meses hemos visto señales alentadoras en este campo. Después de reducirse durante cuatro trimestres consecutivos, nuestra economía ya viene creciendo durante cinco trimestres consecutivos. Después de casi dos años de pérdida de empleos, nuestra economía ha generado más de un millón de empleos del sector privado, solo este año.
 
Y después de estar al borde de la liquidación el año pasado, nuestra industria automotriz está teniendo ganancias sostenidas, las líneas ensambladoras están funcionando otra vez y la industria estadounidense está volviendo a estabilizarse y luchando para recuperarse.
 
De todos modos, el informe laboral del viernes fue un serio recordatorio de ello. Si bien vimos otro mes de crecimiento laboral en noviembre, simplemente no fue suficiente.
 
Eso subraya por qué es tan importante continuar sin demora las otras medidas que tendrán el mayor impacto en el crecimiento de la economía.
 
Primero: tenemos que extender los recortes tributarios para la clase media que van a caducar a fines de este mes. Si no lo hacemos, millones de familias de clase media van a ver descuentos mucho mayores en sus cheques de pago a partir del 1ero de enero. Y eso es lo último que debe pasar. Tras una década en que han perdido terreno, las familias de clase media no están en la situación de enfrentar un aumento en los impuestos y nuestra economía no está para recibir el golpe que resultará del hecho que las familias de clase media tengan menos dinero para gastar.
 
Y en segundo lugar tenemos que extender los beneficios por desempleo para los estadounidenses que han perdido su trabajo en esta difícil economía. Sin beneficios por desempleo, las familias no pueden cubrir sus necesidades básicas comprando productos cultivados, fabricados o vendidos por otros estadounidenses.
 
Juntos, el impacto económico de aumentarle los impuestos a la clase media, y negarles a dos millones de estadounidenses los beneficios por desempleo, nos costarían cientos de miles de empleos más. Simplemente no sería una decisión inteligente.
 
Y negar beneficios por desempleo no solo no es inteligente, sino injusto. Es como decirles a millones de nuestros vecinos que no tienen trabajo hoy, sin haber merecido el despido, que los abandonamos a su suerte.
 
Ese no es el mensaje apropiado en una época de esperanza. Todos conocemos a alguien que está pasando por un mal momento. Cuando eso sucede en Estados Unidos, lo ayudamos a recuperarse. Así somos los estadounidenses. Así se hace en Estados Unidos.
 
Así que simplemente no estoy de acuerdo con la gente que dice que no podemos auxiliar a los estadounidenses que perdieron su empleo durante la peor recesión en generaciones, pero que sí podemos prestarnos cientos de miles de millones de dólares para extender recortes tributarios para el dos por ciento más rico de los estadounidenses. No solo es mala política económica, también es injusto, simple y llanamente.
 
El Congreso debe extender esos necesarios beneficios por desempleo antes del receso de fin de año. Y debe impulsar el crecimiento económico al preservar los recortes tributarios para nuestra clase media. Me alegra que la Cámara de Representantes haya votado de este modo esta semana, y hago un llamado al Senado de Estados Unidos para que haga lo mismo.
 
Miren, no cabe duda de que estamos en una época difícil. Y lento pero seguro estamos luchando para recuperarnos y avanzar. Y vamos a seguir luchando para hacer que esta economía crezca, para fortalecer a nuestra clase media y para restaurar el Sueño Americano. Se los prometo.
 
Y lo último: como el Presidente estará de regreso la próxima semana para grabar este mensaje, aprovecho la oportunidad para desearles, junto con mi familia, una Feliz Navidad, Feliz Jánuka y que lo pasen muy bien estas fiestas y que tengan un Año Nuevo incluso mejor.
 
Gracias y que disfruten el fin de semana.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 October 05, 2010
Remarks by the President and Dr. Jill Biden at White House Summit on Community Colleges
East Room
12:17 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Hello.  Good afternoon, and welcome to the first ever White House Summit on Community Colleges.  I’m Jill Biden, and I’m proud to stand here today as a community college professor.
This is an historic and exciting opportunity for all of us in the community college world.  For years I have said that community colleges are one of America’s best-kept secrets.  Well, with the President of the United States shining a light on us, I think that secret is out.  (Laughter.)
Today’s summit is an important next step in our efforts to meet the President’s goal of having the best-educated, most competitive workforce in the world by the end of this decade.
As we meet here today, families all across our country are struggling.  We see that struggle firsthand in community colleges.  We see people who are determined to build a better life for themselves and their families, no matter how hard it is.  Today, community colleges are the largest, fastest-growing, most affordable segment of America’s higher education system.  For generations, these schools have been an option for many students who didn’t have other options:  recent immigrants, working adults, or students who could not afford or were not quite ready for a four-year institution.
Community colleges are uniquely American -- places where anyone who walks through the door is one step closer to realizing the American Dream.  These schools are flexible and innovative.  For that reason, countries around the world are looking at community colleges as a model to increase workforce preparedness and college graduation among their own citizens.
Community colleges are uniquely positioned to provide the education and training that will prepare students for the jobs in the 21st century.
Schools are forming partnerships with businesses in their communities, ensuring that students are trained for jobs that need to be filled. 
Getting Americans back to work is America’s great challenge.  And community colleges are critically important to preparing graduates for those jobs.  We are here today because community colleges are entering a new day in America, and here’s why:  For more and more people, community colleges are the way to the future.  They’re giving real opportunity to students who otherwise wouldn’t have it.  They’re giving hope to families who thought the American Dream was slipping away.  They are equipping Americans with the skills and expertise that are relevant to the emerging jobs of the future.  They’re opening doors for the middle class at a time when the middle class has seen so many doors close to them.
As the President said, the nations that out-educate us today will out-compete us tomorrow.  That is why he is committed to increasing the number of college graduates in America, so that we will once again lead the world in the percentage of our citizens with a college degree.
Community colleges are absolutely critical to reaching this goal, and to ensuring out country’s economic prosperity in the future.  That is why the President has also challenged all of us to graduate an additional 5 million community college graduates by 2020.
Reaching that goal will take the commitment of everyone in this room, and all of the hardworking community college leaders, faculty and students you represent.
Community college students and graduates across the country are working in jobs that will enable us to expand our green economy, provide Americans with the excellent health care they deserve, and rebuild our country’s infrastructure. 
These are the students like the ones I visited in their state-of-the-art radiology lab last spring at Delgado Community College in New Orleans.  Or the woman I met who, after 16 years as a lab tech, came to Kingsborough Community College in New York for retraining, and graduated in nursing with a job offer waiting.
I meet students and learn about industry partnerships on every campus I visit that reinforce what we in this room know well:  Community colleges are at the center of Americans’ effort to educate our way to a better economy. 
I’ve been a teacher for nearly three decades, and I have spent the past 17 years teaching at a community college.  I know the power of community colleges to change lives.
I have seen the wisdom of Yeats who said that, “Education is not the filling of the pail, but the lighting of a fire.”  All of the teachers here today know the magic of lighting that fire in the soul of a student. 
But as I work hard every day to inspire students, it is ultimately they who inspire me.  I’m inspired by students who overcome significant odds just to show up, workers who have returned to school to improve their job prospects, mothers who juggle jobs and childcare while preparing for a new career, and students who spend two years at a community college before transferring to a four-year school.
At the President’s request, I have visited community colleges around the country to see innovative job partnerships and creative student support programs.  At each school, I hear stories about the perseverance of community college students to make a better life for themselves and their families -- students like Albert, who inspire me and who I am thrilled to welcome here today.  You’re amazing, Albert. 
The programs are different, the students are different, but the aspirations are the same.  These students are working hard to get the training and education they need to make their lives better.  They know that education can open the door to a world of new opportunities. 
They are students like the mother who shared her experience with us on the White House website of working towards a degree while raising three children and straddling financial challenges.  Now employed and the holder of a Bachelor’s and a Master’s degree, she wrote, “Community colleges didn’t just change my life, they gave me my life.” 
Community colleges do that every day.  With the support and the attention of the people in this room, we can serve more students and serve them better than ever.
Our challenge is not just to get students into college, but to keep them there and to graduate them faster with the skills they need to succeed in the American workforce.  This is the moment for community colleges to shine. 
Teaching is my life’s work.  I am grateful and tremendously proud to work with a President and Vice President who value that work.  President Obama is committed to restoring the promise of the American education system.  He recognizes the value of community colleges and is investing in them so that they are the best that they can be.  His leadership is inspiring to all of us who believe that each and every American deserves the opportunity to realize his full potential. 
I am honored to introduce a leader who shares our belief in the power of the community college, President Barack Obama.  (Applause.)
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, everybody.  Thank you very much.  Everybody please have a seat.  Thank you so much.
I want to acknowledge some of the folks who are here who are making an incredible contribution to this effort.  First of all, our Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, is here.  (Applause.)  Our Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis, is here.  (Applause.)  Someone who cares deeply about our veterans and the education that they receive, our Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen, and his wife, Ms. Mullen, are here.  (Applause.)  Representative Brett Guthrie, Republican of Kentucky, is in the house, and has been doing great work on this.  And obviously I am thrilled to not only see Jill Biden here but also Albert Ojeda, who introduced Jill Biden, because I think the story he tells is representative of so many incredible stories all across the country.
I’m so grateful for Jill being willing to lead today’s summit, first of all because she has to spend time putting up with Joe.  (Laughter.)  And that’s a big enough task.  Then to take this one on, too, on behalf of the administration is extraordinarily significant.  I do not think she’s doing it for the administration.  She’s doing it because of the passion she has for community colleges.
Jill has devoted her life to education.  As she said, she’s been a teacher for nearly three decades, although you can’t tell it by looking at her -- (laughter) -- a community college professor for 17 years.  I want it on the record Jill is not playing hooky today.  The only reason she’s here is because her college president gave her permission to miss class.  (Laughter.)  And this morning, between appearing on the Today Show, receiving briefings from her staff and hosting the summit, she was actually grading papers in her White House office.  (Laughter.) 
So I think it’s clear why I asked Jill to travel the country visiting community colleges -– because, as she knows personally, these colleges are the unsung heroes of America’s education system.  They may not get the credit they deserve.  They may not get the same resources as other schools.  But they provide a gateway to millions of Americans to good jobs and a better life.
These are places where young people can continue their education without taking on a lot of debt.  These are places where workers can gain new skills to move up in their careers.  These are places where anyone with a desire to learn and to grow can take a chance on a brighter future for themselves and their families -- whether that’s a single mom, or a returning soldier, or an aspiring entrepreneur. 
And community colleges aren’t just the key to the future of their students.  They’re also one of the keys to the future of our country.  We are in a global competition to lead in the growth industries of the 21st century.  And that leadership depends on a well-educated, highly skilled workforce.
We know, for example, that in the coming years, jobs requiring at least an associate’s degree are going to grow twice as fast as jobs that don’t require college.  We will not fill those jobs -– or keep those jobs on our shores –- without community colleges.
So it was no surprise when one of the main recommendations of my Economic Advisory Board -– who I met with yesterday -– was to expand education and job training.  These are executives from some of America’s top companies.  Their businesses need a steady supply of people who can step into jobs involving a lot of technical knowledge and skill.  They understand the importance of making sure we’re preparing folks for the jobs of the future.
In fact, throughout our history, whenever we’ve faced economic challenges, we’ve responded by seeking new ways to harness the talents of our people.  And that’s one of the primary reasons that we have prospered.  In the 19th century, we built public schools and land grant colleges –- transforming not just education, but our entire economy.  In the 20th century, we passed the G.I. Bill and invested in math and science –- helping to unleash a wave of innovation that helped to forge the great American middle class. 
But in recent years, we’ve failed to live up to this legacy, especially in higher education.  In just a decade, we’ve fallen from first to ninth in the proportion of young people with college degrees.  That not only represents a huge waste of potential; in the global marketplace it represents a threat to our position as the world’s leading economy. 
As far as I’m concerned, America does not play for second place, and we certainly don’t play for ninth.  So I’ve set a goal:  By 2020, America will once again lead the world in producing college graduates.  And I believe community colleges will play a huge part in meeting this goal, by producing an additional 5 million degrees and certificates in the next 10 years.
That’s why last year I launched the American Graduation Initiative.  I promised that we would end wasteful subsidies to big banks for student loans, and instead use that money to make college more affordable, and to make a historic investment in community colleges.  And after a tough fight, we passed those reforms, and today we’re using this money towards the interest of higher education in America.
And this is helping us modernize community colleges at a critical time -– because many of these schools are under pressure to cut costs and to cap enrollments and scrap courses even as demand has soared.  It’s going to make it possible for colleges to better harness technology in the classroom and beyond.  And it’s going to promote reform, as colleges compete for funding by improving graduation rates, and matching courses to the needs of local businesses, and making sure that when a graduate is handed a diploma it means that she or he are ready for a career.
We’re also helping students succeed by making college more affordable.  So we’ve increased student aid by thousands of dollars.  We’ve simplified the loan application process.  And we’re making it easier for students to pay back their loans by limiting payments to 10 percent of their income.  But reaching the 2020 goal that I’ve set is not just going to depend on government.  It also depends on educators and students doing their part.  And it depends on businesses and non-for-profits working with colleges to connect students with jobs. 
So that’s why we’re holding this summit.  That’s why I’m asking my Economic Advisory Board to reach out to employers across the country and come up with new ways for businesses and community colleges to work together.  Based on this call to action, yesterday we announced a new partnership called Skills for America’s Future.  And the idea is simple:  Businesses and community colleges work together to match the work in the classroom with the needs of the boardroom.  And already, businesses from PG&E, to UTC, to the Gap have announced their support, as have business leaders like my friend Penny Pritzker, and the Aspen Institute’s Walter Isaacson.  I hope that the companies, schools and nonprofits that all of you lead will take part.
Today, we can also announce the Gates Foundation is starting a new five-year initiative to raise community college graduation rates.  This is critically important because more than half of those who enter community colleges fail to either earn a two-year degree or transfer to a earn a four-year degree.  So we want to thank Melinda Gates, who’s here, for that terrific contribution.  And the Aspen Institute and several leading foundations are launching a competitive prize for community college excellence.  It’s going to shine a spotlight on community colleges delivering truly exceptional results –- places that often don’t get a lot of attention, but make a tremendous difference in their students’ lives.
So we’re investing in community colleges.  We’re making college more affordable.  And we’re bringing together businesses, nonprofits and schools to train folks for the jobs of a new century.  Now, all of this will help ensure that we continue to lead the global economy -– but only if we maintain this commitment to education that’s always been central to our success.
That’s why I so strongly disagree with the economic plan that was released last week by the Republican leaders in Congress, which would actually cut education by 20 percent.  It would reduce or eliminate financial aid for 8 million college students.  And it would leave community colleges without the resources they need to meet the goals we’ve talked about today. 
Instead, this money would help pay for a $700 billion tax cut that only 2 percent of the wealthiest Americans would ever see –- an average of $100,000 for every millionaire and billionaire in the country.  And that just doesn’t make sense -– not for students, not for our economy.
Think about it.  China isn’t slashing education by 20 percent right now.  India is not slashing education by 20 percent.  We are in a fight for the future -– a fight that depends on education.  And cutting aid for 8 million students, or scaling back our community -- our commitment to community colleges, that’s like unilaterally disarming our troops right as they head to the frontlines.
So we obviously have to get serious about our deficit.  That’s why, after decades of profligacy, my administration report pay-as-you-go rules, proposed a three-year freeze on non-security spending.  That’s why we’ve formed a bipartisan deficit reduction commission.
But what we can’t do is fund tax cuts for those who don’t need it by slashing education for those who do.  There’s a better way for us to do this.  And I want to work together with everybody concerned -- Republican and Democrat -- to figure that out.
To use an expression familiar to those of you who are from the Midwest:  You don’t eat your seed corn.  (Laughter.)  We can’t accept less investment in our young people if our country is going to move forward.  It would mean giving up on the promise of so many people who might not be able to pursue an education, like the millions of students at community colleges across this country. 
So I just want to use as an example Derek Blumke, who’s here today.  Where’s Derek?  Right here.  Derek spent six years in the Air Force, three deployments in the Afghan theater, putting his life at risk to keep this country safe.  And when he returned, he started classes at his local community college in northern Michigan.  Now, apparently, what I’m told is, he wasn’t sure whether he was smart enough to do the work, and he also was concerned that he wouldn’t get the support that he needed. 
And he was wrong on both fronts.  His professors not only helped him transition from the military -– even as he continued to serve in the Michigan Air National Guard -– but also helped him to earn his associate’s degree with honors.  Then he transferred to the University of Michigan -- Go Blue -- (laughter) -- where he graduated just a few weeks ago.  And while he was there, he co-founded Student Veterans of America to help returning veterans like himself.  So congratulations, Derek.  (Applause.) 
Or we can look to the example set by Albert Ojeda, who just spoke to you.  He didn’t have any advantages in life -- grew up in a tough neighborhood in Phoenix, lost his father to violence, lost his mother to prison.  But that didn’t stop him from pursuing an education.  It didn’t stop him from attending community college, become an honor student, become the first member of his family to graduate from college. 
There are so many folks out there like Derek and Albert.  And I think about the many community college students who’ve written letters to me or emails through whitehouse.gov about how important community college has been to them.  One person said he had been laid off and decided to return to school after 17 years.  And attending community college “literally helped save my life” -- that’s what he said.  “I can not only see an associate’s degree next year, but a new future filled with possibilities for the first time.”
A new future filled with possibilities.  That’s why we’re here today.  That’s the promise of an education not just for any one student, but for our entire country.  And that’s why it’s so important that we work together on behalf of community colleges -– and an education system that harnesses the talents and hard work of every single American. 
So thank you for the incredible work that each and every one of you do out there in schools, business folks who are supporting these community colleges, the students who are doing so much to contribute to our country.  Let’s get busy.  Thank you very much.
END
12:40 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  September 01, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Joseph Biden at the Change of Command Ceremony for United States Forces-Iraq
Camp Victory
Baghdad, Iraq
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Ladies and gentlemen, the last several years, every time I have been in this old palace, am here, I can’t but help think of the irony that we are here today occupying a palace for a noble reason that was once occupied by Saddam Hussein. 
Secretary Gates, Admiral Mullen, General Mattis, General Odierno, General Austin, Ambassador Jeffrey, our distinguished and honored Iraqi leaders and military, it’s an honor to be with you today. 
It’s an honor to be joined by such a distinguished group of Americans and Iraqi commanders and civilian leaders bound together, I might add -- as a nation, we are now bound together as well by years of shared struggle and significant sacrifice.
In the predawn hours of March 20, 2003, columns of coalition troops set off across the desert and marshlands from Kuwait en route to Baghdad.  Last week -- after seven-and-a-half years that tested our mettle like no conflict in recent American history -- the last of our combat units followed that same dusty highway out of Iraq, on their way home.
As President Obama declared in the Oval Office last night, the United States has now ended our combat mission in Iraq and Iraqi troops are taking lead responsibility for their country’s security.
We’ve kept a promise, a promise made to the American people and to the people of Iraq, by drawing down our forces to roughly 50,000.  And we’re on track to remove all of our troops by the end of next year, according to the agreement signed by President Bush made with the Iraqi government.
Operation Iraqi Freedom is over. But American engagement with Iraq will continue with the mission that begins today -- Operation New Dawn.
As the name suggests, this ceremony not only marks the change of a command, but the start of a different chapter in the relationship with Iraq.  Our remaining troops -- I might add, as combat ready, if need be, as any in our military -- will advise and assist Iraqi forces, support partnered counterterrorism operations and protect our military and civilian personnel, as well as our infrastructure.
And we are ramping up our civilian and diplomatic effort to strengthen Iraq’s sovereignty, stability and self-reliance at the very time we are drawing down combat forces.
Our goal -- our goal is not just a physically secure Iraq, but an economically prosperous and stable one as well. 
With our Iraqi partners, our hope is to be able to enhance the ties of trade and commerce, increase our cultural and educational exchanges, open consulates in Basra and Erbil -- all to ensure that our engagement spans the breadth and length of this country.
Our diplomats -- our diplomats will support Iraq's efforts to build strong ties with their neighbors and the wider world, while working through the remaining obligations at the United Nations.
And here in Baghdad, those efforts will be led by an outstanding ambassador, Jim Jeffrey, who may be new to this particular job, but is certainly not new to the region nor this country.  His knowledge and commitment run deep.  They go back to his earlier service in the Bush administration as a Deputy National Security Advisor, as well as at one point the DCM right here in Baghdad. 
And he is backed by an extraordinary team of Foreign Service professionals and civilian experts, who are moving to the forefront of our effort now.  They have always been engaged, but now they’re moving to the forefront, people like Erin Eddy, a former Peace Corps volunteer in Ecuador, who now serves “outside the wire” as a public diplomacy officer on a regional -- provincial reconstruction team in Kirkuk. 
Or Madeline Chikko, who became an American citizen after her family fled Iraq three decades ago and has now chosen to return in 2008 to work with the Ministry of Justice here in Iraq on property rights and rule of law.
Or Dave Butzer, a 27 year-veteran of the Oregon police force, who has since then trained law enforcement officers in Kosovo, Jordan and Yemen, and who now advises the Iraqi Interior Ministry. 
Along with our military and diplomats, and the civilians in Iraq -- we have borne -- they have borne the burden of lengthy deployments, like you in the military, missing anniversaries and holidays, births of children and the loss of loved ones.
This change of mission, to state the obvious, would never have been possible without the resolve and tremendous sacrifice and competence of our military -- the finest -- if our Iraqi friends will forgive us, the finest fighting force in the world and I would argue the finest fighting force that ever has existed.  And I don’t believe that is hyperbole.
And that’s a large part, because it has been led by such a significant group of men and women over the last three decade.  And I want to thank my friend, Secretary Gates, for his unique willingness to serve two Presidents of different parties with differing views -- a testimony to Bob’s patriotism, his commitment to service and above all his determination to see this effort through.  (Applause.)  He deserves your applause. 
If you excuse the personal reference, as we used to say in the Senate, this is one good man -- one good man.  We’ve also been blessed by the wisdom and steady hand of Admiral Mike Mullen and the leadership of General David Petraeus, who I might add is still serving this country in a way that is beyond what we should ask of anyone.  I shouldn’t joke about this, but I visited him down in Florida and -- before he headed off, Bob.  And he said, “Just as I was getting -- finally getting to live like the Air Force, you’re asking me to move.”  (Laughter.)  It was a lovely place.  (Laughter.)  And by the way, we owe his wife and his family as well.
And also by General Jim Mattis, who is taking his command.  And on his last day of his command, I’d like to especially thank General Ray Odierno.  This man is not only a warrior, but a diplomat in the best American tradition.  I want to thank him for his exceptional -- and I’m not exaggerating, his exceptional service for more than four years leading forces here and working closely with Iraqi political leaders, many of them sitting here today.  And I think they would all acknowledge they have absolute complete faith and trust in this man.
General, four years and five months is an extraordinary sacrifice for both you and your family, and I can only imagine -- as a matter of fact, I know how joyous your homecoming is going to be and you richly deserve it.  And by the way, you owe Linda big -- really, really big.
And I would be remiss if I did not in mentioning the sacrifices that the General has made, like many of you, I would be remiss if I did not recognize his son, Capt. Tony Odierno, who made a great sacrifice here in Iraq on behalf of his country and was awarded the Purple Heart and the Bronze Star with a V for Valor.  And now he works for the New York Yankees, and I imagine you’re going to go home and see a couple of games -- I imagine.
I’m confident as well that General Austin, who has already served valiantly in Iraq and beyond, is going to continue this proud legacy.  We’re extremely fortunate to have you take command, General, and I look forward to working with you.  And I know you know many of the Iraqi political leaders here and their commanding generals, and it’s going to be a seamless transition.
Our fighting men and women were given a mission in Iraq that was as complicated as any in our history, an assignment that proved, as Clausewitz taught us, that “War is the realm of uncertainty.”
Troops steeped in military doctrine were asked to deal with challenges ranging from electricity to unemployment, currency exchange to trash collection.
A high-speed invasion that toppled a tyrant became a grinding struggle against violent extremists.  Empty roads became deathtraps.  Suicide became a devastating weapon, requiring split-second decisions by young American military women and men that could save the life of a comrade or shed the blood of an innocent.
And enemies like Al Qaeda in Iraq waged unspeakable violence against Iraqi civilians in an attempt to foster hatred in communities that worship the exact same God.
Thus far, they have failed.  The Iraqi people, to their great credit, have rejected the ugly face of violence and cast their lot, as well as their ballots, for a better future.
And so today, while the threat -- a tragic reality -- of further bloodshed remains, violence has reached the lowest point since 2003, when we arrived here -- shortly after we arrived here.  
And a great deal of credit goes to Iraq’s security forces -- more than 650,000 strong, including highly trained special operations forces who are increasingly ready to defend their fellow citizens.  In recent months, the Iraqi military secured an election, killed or captured most of Al Qaeda in Iraq and most of their leaders and made significant inroads against other terrorist groups.
Because of their competence, we have over the past year -- and it’s been over the past year as the General will tell you and you all know -- been able to transfer thousands of square miles of territory and hundreds of bases to Iraqi control.
Perhaps the most important development of all is that in the aftermath of a second national election, Iraqi leaders are sitting down to settle their differences through negotiation and not through violence.  Another way of putting it -- as my staff always kids me for saying -- politics has broken out in Iraq.
The fact that no single party or coalition got anywhere near a clear majority would make forming a government, a parliamentary system, difficult under any circumstances.  A decade -- after a decade of dictatorship and war, it’s an even more daunting task here in Iraq.
Unlike after the last election, however, a caretaker government is providing security and basic services and preventing a dangerous power vacuum from erupting.  But that is not a durable solution to the many challenges and significant opportunities Iraq faces.  The Iraqi people voted in large numbers across communities, and if you don’t mind -- forgive me for saying so -- they expect a government that reflects the result of the votes they cast.
And that’s going to require Iraqi politicians to place the national interest above their own, a difficult thing in any country, including ours.  It is not our place to tell the Iraqis who should lead.  But I strongly urge them to match the courage that their citizens have shown by bringing this process to a close and forming a government.  And I trust they will do so soon.
Since war is a human endeavor, its contours can never be fully drawn with numbers.  But the sheer scope of our commitment to the Iraqi people bears some reflection.
More than a million American service members have deployed here since the conflict began.  And I am awed -- I mean, I am in awe of their accomplishments and their significant sacrifices, including all of you sitting before me today.
This is particularly true for more than 30,000 troops wounded in action, and over 4,408 fallen angels who have made the ultimate sacrifice along with members of the international coalition.
It’s no secret that this war has divided Americans, but they have never shrunk -- or either political party has shrunk from a united support for an extraordinary United States military, for extraordinary service of our troops.
As President Obama said last night, now is the time to put these differences behind us and come together to meet the many challenges that remain and that we face at home.
Today is also an important acknowledgment -- it’s important to acknowledge the magnitude -- the magnitude of the Iraqi losses in this conflict.  Tens of thousands of security forces and innocent civilians have been killed.  Many times that number have been wounded and displaced.
I pray that all those scarred by this war in Iraq come to know the balm of lasting peace.  And I believe -- I truly believe that their darkest days are now behind them.  They have such a great opportunity as they step up to it.
After all that Iraqis endured, we understand their deeply felt desire to control their own lives, determine their own fate, and maintain their own security.
That’s why we kept President Bush’s commitment to withdraw our forces from Iraqi cities last summer, why President Obama has now kept his promise, made one month after we took office to end our combat mission and draw down to a force of 50,000, and why we will make good on our agreement with the Iraqis to remove all our forces by the end of next year.
We gather today in a capital that once boasted the planet’s greatest assemblage of universities, hospitals, and museums -- a cultural beacon whose centerpiece was a grand intellectual bazaar known literally as the House of Wisdom.
In modern times, Iraq has faced hardships most nations cannot fathom.  But it is blessed with vast national bounty, natural resources.  And the wisdom of the ages lives on in the people here in Iraq -- educated, adaptive, and above all resilient people.
This inevitable store of human talent and natural wealth are the tools that can now forge a secure and prosperous future for the people of Iraq.  And god-willing, you’re on the path to fulfill that promise again.  We’re proud to be your partner. 
Thank you all.  May God bless you all, and may God protect our troops.  (Applause.)
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 July 14, 2010
Vicepresidente Biden, Presidenta del Consejo de Asesores Económicos Romer Dan a Conocer Nuevo Análisis Sobre el Empleo e Impacto Económico de la Ley para la Recuperación
Informe trimestral del consejo indica que la Ley para la Recuperación es responsable por aproximadamente 3 millones de empleos y programas que propician inversión de capital privado externo triplican fondos
      WASHINGTON, DC – El Vicepresidente Joe Biden y la presidenta del Consejo de Asesores Económicos (Council of Economic Advisers o CEA) Christina Romer están dando a conocer hoy el informe trimestral más reciente del CEA sobre el impacto económico de la Ley para la Recuperación. El informe concluye que la Ley para la Recuperación ya es responsable por 2.5 millones a 3.6 millones –o aproximadamente 3 millones– de empleos y que por cada dólar de la Ley para la Recuperación que el gobierno invirtió en los programas concebidos para propiciar la inversión de capital externo, las empresas privadas y otros están invirtiendo casi el triple.
  Se puede ver el informe completo AQUÍ.
  Cuarto informe trimestral del Consejo de Asesores Económicos sobre el impacto económico de la Ley para la Recuperación y Reinversión en Estados Unidos (American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) del 2009
Conclusiones principales
  La Ley para la Recuperación ha tenido un impacto significativo en el empleo y crecimiento económico:
  Hasta el segundo trimestre del 2010, la Ley para la Recuperación aumentó el número de empleos entre 2.5 millones y 3.6 millones de puestos. Esto nos lleva por buen camino para lograr el objetivo de 3.5 millones de empleos para fines de año.
  El CEA calcula que para el segundo trimestre del 2010, la Ley para la Recuperación aumentó el nivel del PIB entre 2.7 y 3.2 por ciento. Estos cálculos son muy similares a los de una gran variedad de analistas, entre ellos la Oficina de Presupuesto del Congreso (Congressional Budget Office).
  ·         La inversión en sectores como infraestructura, energía limpia y tecnología de comunicaciones aumentó aproximadamente 50 por ciento del primer al segundo trimestre del 2010.
  La Ley para la Recuperación está haciendo inversiones que benefician a la economía actualmente y lo seguirán haciendo durante mucho tiempo:
  ·         $319,000 millones en la ley han sido destinados a “inversiones públicas” que no sólo están “contribuyendo a que la economía se recupere y haciendo que los estadounidenses vuelvan a trabajar en este momento, sino que también están realizando inversiones en sectores como energía limpia, informática para el campo de salud, carreteras y la capacitación de nuestros trabajadores, lo que beneficiará a la economía durante muchos años”. Hasta la fecha, se han asignado dos tercios de estos fondos y más de una cuarta parte ya se ha entregado. El CEA calcula que los $86.3 millones en inversión ya generaron o preservaron más de 800,000 empleos para el segundo trimestre del 2010, un aumento de 30 por ciento con relación al primer trimestre.
  La Ley para la Recuperación está propiciando inversiones significativas por parte de empresas privadas y otras entidades:
  ·         Una porción de estas inversiones públicas, $95,000 millones, está propiciando la inversión de fondos externos por parte de empresas privadas y otras entidades. Con la inversión de cada dólar, se apoya $4.00 en actividad económica, lo que significa que $286,000 millones en inversión externa se suman a los fondos de la Ley para la Recuperación, para apoyar $382,000 millones en actividad total de los proyectos. Entre los beneficios de esta “inversión conjunta” se encuentran:
  ·         Impulsar la inversión privada: Ya que el mercado crediticio aún se está recuperando de la crisis económica, la Ley para la Recuperación está estimulando directamente $153,000 millones de inversión tan sólo del sector privado.
  ·         Alinear incentivos económicos: Ya que los inversionistas privados usan cantidades significativas de su propio dinero en proyectos de la Ley para la Recuperación, se comprometen con ellos y tienen mayor incentivo para usar los fondos responsablemente.
  ·         Aumentar el respaldo en general: El gobierno federal tiene la responsabilidad de usar el dinero de los contribuyentes de la manera más eficaz y eficiente posible. El dinero de los contribuyentes rinde más cuando la inversión privada multiplica esos dólares.
  La energía limpia es uno de los sectores que está propiciando mayor inversión con la Ley para la Recuperación:
  ·         Por sectores, el de energía limpia cuenta con la mayor cantidad de actividad total apoyada, donde una contribución federal de $46,000 millones se sumará a $107,000 millones para apoyar más de $150,000 millones en inversión total en eficiencia energética, generación de energía renovable, investigación y otros proyectos.
  ·         Uno de esos proyectos es el programa de red inteligente del Departamento de Energía, que promoverá el consumo más sensato de energía y aumentará la transparencia en la manera en que se consume energía. El sector privado, impulsado por una inversión de $4,500 millones de la Ley para la Recuperación, invirtió $6,000 millones adicionales en proyectos de red inteligente, lo que llevará la inversión total a más de $10,000 millones.
  ·         Por ejemplo, se les ha asignado a Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana y Wyoming $88 millones para un proyecto regional de demostración de red inteligente. El proyecto de $178 millones, expandido por $90 millones en fondos de contrapartida de empresas tecnológicas y de servicios públicos, abarca 12 proyectos de servicios públicos y 15 de prueba, y los estados calculan que generará o preservará 1,500 empleos en cinco estados.
  Los bonos Build America de la Ley para la Recuperación también están generando una significativa inversión externa, y a la vez están ahorrándoles a los gobiernos estatales y locales miles de millones de dólares:
  ·         En desarrollo económico, un aporte por la Ley para la Recuperación de aproximadamente $14,000 millones se está sumando a más de $130,000 en inversión externa para respaldar más de $145,000 millones en actividad económica. Los bonos Build America (BAB) constituyen gran parte de esa actividad.
  ·         Para el 30 de junio, 2010, se han emitido bonos con un valor nominal total de $115,000 millones, en 1,446 ocasiones separadas en 49 estados, Washington, DC y 2 territorios. Los bonos permitirán que las municipalidades originen préstamos con 35 por ciento de los intereses pagados por el gobierno federal. Los préstamos son atractivos para una variedad de inversionistas, como fondos de pensión, que no se benefician del estatus de exoneración de impuestos de los bonos municipales tradicionales. Al ofrecer más fuentes de fondos, los bonos reducen el costo de intereses de las entidades emisoras. El Tesoro calculó recientemente que los bonos les han ahorrado a gobiernos estatales y locales aproximadamente $12,000 millones.
  ·         Por ejemplo, en Minneapolis, la junta del condado de Hennepin recaudó $27 millones por medio de la emisión de bonos Build America, los cuales está combinando con bonos estatales y del condado para financiar los $80 millones para la reconstrucción del puente de la avenida Lowry. Se calcula que los contribuyentes de Minneapolis ahorrarán de $3 a $5 millones.
  Proyectos de construcción de edificios, descontaminación y conservación ambiental también se están beneficiando de los efectos de la Ley para la Recuperación en propiciar otras inversiones.
  ·         Otros sectores incluidos en el informe incluyen descontaminación y conservación ambiental, en los que una inversión de $11,000 está respaldando más de $21,000 millones en actividad económica; la construcción de edificios, donde una inversión de $6,400 millones está respaldando $29,400 millones, entre varias otras.
  Los programas de la Ley para la Recuperación que propician otras inversiones están activando capital privado y contribuyendo a que continúen los proyectos de energía limpia durante un difícil momento económico:
  ·         En un caso, el CEA examina la sección 1603 del Programa de Asistencia en Efectivo para Energía (Energy Cash Assistance Program), para ver si esta inversión conjunta se habría realizado sin los fondos aportados por la Ley para la Recuperación.
·         Al examinar los años previos en los que no hubo inversión nacional para impulsar la actividad del sector privado y compararlos con los años en que sí la hubo, los proyectos del CEA que aumentan la capacidad eólica en el 2009 se habrían reducido en más de la mitad sin la Ley para la Recuperación y otros incentivos.
En el 2009, se instalaron proyectos que aumentaron la capacidad eólica en 10,000 MW, y la Ley para la Recuperación y otros incentivos fueron responsables por más de 6,000 MW de ellos.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 28, 2010
TRANSCRIPT: Remarks by Vice President Biden on the Passing of Senator Robert C. Byrd
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: "As we used to say in my years in the Senate, if you’ll excuse a point of personal privilege here for a moment, a very close friend of mine, one of my mentors -- a guy who was there when I was a 29-year-old kid being sworn into the United States Senate shortly thereafter; a guy who stood in the rain, in a pouring rain, freezing rain outside a church as I buried my daughter and my wife before I got sworn in, Robert C. Byrd.  He passed away today.  He was the -- we lost the dean of the United States Senate, but also the state of West Virginia lost its most fierce advocate and, as I said, I lost a dear friend.
 
“Throughout his 51 years, the longest tenure of any member in Congress in the history of the United States, Robert C. Byrd was a tough, compassionate, and outspoken leader and dedicated above all else to making life better for the people of the mountain state -- his state, the state of West Virginia.  He never lost sight of home.  He may have spent half a century in Washington.  But there’s a guy -- if anybody wondered -- he never, never, never, never took his eye of his beloved mountain state.  And we shall not -- to paraphrase the poet -- we shall not see his like again.  And the Senate is a lesser place for his going."  
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 09, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Joe Biden to University Students in Nairobi, Kenya
Kenyatta International Conference Center
Nairobi, Kenya
10:58 A.M. (local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Hello, my name is Joe Biden.  I work for Barack Obama.  (Laughter and applause.)
Now, I know no one in Kenya is familiar with Barack Obama, but I can tell you although for years as a United States senator, I had -- I was on a committee called the Foreign Relations Committee, the chairman, and did a lot of work relating to Africa, I hear about Kenya all the time from Barack Obama.  He sends his love to you, not just your love to him.  (Applause.)
And, Wangari, it’s an honor to be with you.  I am very accustomed these days to hanging out with Nobel laureates.  (Laughter.)  I work for one, I get to meet one here, our Secretary of Energy is one -- I am feeling very, very insufficient not having a Nobel Peace Prize.  (Laughter.)  But it’s an honor to be with you, it genuinely is.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.
You are one of the great treasures not only of your country and of the world, but you’re the embodiment -- in my view -- of what I’m going to talk about today, that is the human capital that this great country has to offer.  And you are -- you are one of the great pieces of that capital.  It’s an honor, again, to be with you.
Now, where is Professor Freida Brown, the Vice Chancellor of United States International?  (Applause.)  Freida, professor -- I want you all to know we have caused this beautiful woman a lot of concern.  She has been the main person in making sure that my ability to speak here was made possible.  I want to personally thank you for all the cooperation and all you do.  (Applause.)  Helping organize us at a speech is a very difficult thing to do, and I thank you very much, Professor.
Ladies and gentlemen, students, leaders, and friends -- I can’t tell you how much I appreciate being invited to speak before you all today.  And I thank you for the warm welcome.  And as I said, I bring greetings and love from President Obama.  I will relay to him that you said, send him -- you’re going to send [him] love.  But I want to reiterate, again, he sends his.  He is committed.  He is concerned, and he is deeply involved in the formation of our policy.  And something that -- and he looks forward to the day that he will be able to come and visit as President of the United States of America.  (Applause.)  I’m sure there may not be -- I doubt whether there’s enough room in the country to house everyone who wants to see him when he comes, but he is anxious to come.  
 
It’s great to be in your beautiful country.  And it’s great to be in front of all of you.  I come here as a representative of the United States to say one thing, one primary message -- the United States stands with you, stands with you on your journey to a secure, free, democratic, and prosperous Kenya.  It’s a journey nearly 50 years in the making.
 
On December 12, 1963, 50,000 Kenyans filled the stadium in Nairobi and 200,000 -- 200,000 more -- I can remember, as a college student, watching 200,000 more pack the hillsides around the stadium.  An entire nation’s eyes watched as, at the stroke of midnight, the new Kenyan flag was unfurled for the first time, making Kenya the 34th independent state in Africa.
 
Earlier that week, American President Lyndon Baines Johnson sent a congratulatory letter to Prime Minister Kenyatta, welcoming Kenya to the family of nations and comparing Kenya’s journey toward independence with that of America’s.  And he said, and I quote, “As our own freedom for all our citizens was proclaimed to the world by our Declaration of Independence, so Kenya’s freedom begins with her declaration of independence today.”
 
Some 50 years later, the promise of that day still pulses through this country, on the bustling streets of Nairobi, from -- up to Mount Kenya, from the coastal shores of Mombasa to the plains of the Maasai Mara.  Once, the wealth of a nation was defined by the expanse of its land, the size of its population or the strength of its army, the abundance of its natural resources.  But, now, we know -- and you know -- that the true wealth of a nation is found in its human capital, in the skill, ingenuity, and determination of its people.  And by that measure, Kenya -- Kenya is a very wealthy nation.  Indeed, Kenya is a rich nation.
 
You have no oil.  You have no precious minerals.  But you have built the largest non-oil, non-mineral based economy in sub-Saharan Africa.  You have become -- (applause) -- you have become the hub for the transportation for the goods and people that are -- flow through East Africa.  And you are the financial capital of East Africa.
 
Your diplomats have helped solve some of Africa’s most intractable problems.  Your military is small in number, but large in stature, helping to bring stability to Sierra Leone to East Timor.  You’ve produced world-renowned scientists, geneticists, environmentalists, writers, and a Nobel Prize winner.  (Applause.)
 
At the heart of this success is a conviction that education -- education has the potential to transform a nation -- seven public universities, over 20 private ones, among the most of any on the continent of Africa; a determination to make primary and secondary education available to all, although there’s a long way to go. 
 
Americans know first-hand your commitment to education.  Thousands of our citizens have studied in Kenya.  And Kenyans have long been among the largest groups of African students at American universities.  And today, Kenyans are the largest group of African students at American universities.  (Applause.)  And that tradition goes back before your independence.  One of the earliest pioneers was a fellow named Barack Obama Sr., the father of a man who is now the President of the United States of America.
 
Kenya and Kenyans have much to be proud of.  But the full force of your potential -- as all of you young students know -- has yet to be released.  You face daunting obstacles.  Kenya is situated in a very tough neighborhood.  Somalia’s decades of instability have generated human tragedy and global threats.  We recognize the burden it’s placed on Somalia’s neighbors and the terrible human cost that the Somali people have borne.
 
And I want to thank -- I want to thank Kenya for hosting Somali refugees who have come looking for safety and for prosecuting pirates not just in Somali waters, but increasingly in the vast swathes of East African waters. 
 
Next January, the referendum on the future of southern Sudan envisioned by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement will occur, and it must be credible and it must be peaceful.  Sudan is hurtling toward a monumental decision that demands urgent international attention and preparation.  And far too many of the people in Sudan’s Darfur region continue to live with unacceptable insecurity.  These regional issues are all on your doorstep.  They are felt in your communities.  They are present, real challenges that we must work on together in partnership to address.
 
The global financial crisis -- generated through no fault of Kenya’s -- dampened your economy, slowing demand for Kenyan goods abroad and lessened the flow of tourists eager to see Kenya’s natural beauty.  Global climate change is not a phenomenon of Kenya’s making, but its consequences affect your forests, your harvests, and your way of life.
 
Kenya feels the effects of these problems and should, because of your wealth of human capital, be a part of a global solution -- a strong African voice on the international stage.  But that voice has been muted by internal problems -- problems that have held you back from making an even greater contribution.
 
Too many of your resources have been lost to corruption, and not a single high-level official has ever been held accountable for these crimes.  Too many of your institutions have lost the people’s confidence.  And too many times, Kenya has been divided against itself, torn apart by ethnic tensions, manipulated by leaders who place their own interests above the interests of their country.  Too many young people have found nothing but dead ends as they seek opportunity and the path to a better future. 
 
The crisis that gripped Kenya in the wake of the 2007 elections revealed just how dangerous these forces can be.  They are dangerous, but they are not immovable.  Change is within your grasp.  And that change will be realized when government is transparent, accountable, and participatory; when corrupt officials are called to account in a court of law, instead of meeting only the indifferent shrug of impunity; when political power changes hands peacefully, but the will of the voters, and those who did not prevail decide -- and decide that their efforts should be moved to constructive opposition; when Kenyans have confidence that the courts and the police are honest, and are committed solely to the pursuit of justice; when the members of the political leadership represent a range, a wide range, of viewpoints reflecting and responding to the needs of Kenyans everywhere.
 
Your coalition government has agreed to a reform agenda that would bring about the fundamental change that Kenyans are seeking.  If implemented fully, corrupt officials will be finally held accountable.  The judiciary and the police force will place the pursuit of justice above the pursuit of personal gain.  Land rights and ownership will be governed by the rule of law, not by the whims of the powerful.  Kenyan women and girls -- the most untapped resource of this nation and almost every nation in the world -- will be ever better positioned to contribute to their communities and their country at every level.  And a new constitution will put in place a framework to accelerate those reforms, including reducing executive power by building up the checks and balances of your parliament and your judiciary.
Folks, in my experience of 36 years on the world stage, stability ultimately rests on the separation of powers --no power, no branch of government should go unchecked, including presidential power.  The truth is, better governance is not just an end in itself, it is your path to a lasting democratic stability and your ultimate stability.  And, I might add -- presumptuous of me, as an outsider, to say -- it’s the best route to economic prosperity, sparking job creation, opening up opportunity, and improving the way of life for Kenyans everywhere.
 
As I said earlier, the real strength of Kenya is your human capital.  And you have so much potential, with two-thirds of your citizens under the age of 25 -- two-thirds under the age of 25.  That should be an incredible sense and source of strength that should be mined, that should be nurtured.  But it requires creative and productive outlets for the energy and enthusiasm of the youth in your country.
Putting in place a new constitution and strengthening your institutions and the rule of law will not only unleash the energy of the youth, deepen the roots of your democracy, and ultimately guarantee your security -- it will also further open the door to major American development programs like the Millennium Challenge.  There’s so much more we could do, and want to do, in partnership with you.  It could provide millions of dollars in grant assistance to Kenya that you would know how to use well to build this great nation.
 
Reform will also encourage -- and I have -- I have been all over the world in my career.  I promise you, foreign investment depends upon stability, transparency, the rule of law, and the crackdown on corruption.  So if you make these changes, I promise you, new foreign private investment will come in like you’ve never seen and you will have a reinvigorated tourism industry that will exceed the billion dollars it was before the economic crisis.  As I told your President and Prime Minister, who I met with jointly yesterday, Americans -- I can only speak for America, Americans want to do business here.  You have everything that they would want to cooperate and participate here.  They want to travel here.  And if you provide the right climate, they will come -- and not only they, but the rest of the world will come.  You are the keystone to East Africa -- literally, not figuratively -- you are the keystone.
 
Fostering the kind of change that is at hand is not up to the political elites, it’s up to you.  It’s up to the Kenyan people.  It’s up to each one of you.  As President Obama said, “Africa’s future is up to Africans.”  We can’t dictate it -- nor should we -- but you can, you can.  And it’s virtually unlimited.  Don’t let others determine for you.  Don’t let others determine for Kenya what Kenyans think.  Determine for yourselves the Kenya you actually need. 
 
Democracies are most effective when people not only vote for them, but embrace their responsibilities under a democratic system -- when they commit to be active citizens, aware citizens, when they participate, when they vote.  
 
Today, Kenya is having a great national debate about a new constitution.  That debate will culminate in a referendum this August.  The cooperation of [the] President and Prime Minister in support of the constitutional review process is extremely encouraging.  But the ultimate responsibility, the real power, does not rest with them -- it rests with you.  It rests with the people of Kenya.  By your participation, by your vote -- as cynical as you may have become about the process -- by your participation, by your vote, you have before you a singular opportunity to strengthen Kenya’s democratic institutions, none like since the evening at midnight that that flag was unfurled, an opportunity to open up to opportunity to give a new generation new power to help Kenya realize its immense potential.
 
The United States strongly supports the process of constitutional reform, including providing assistance for voter registration and civic education, so that Kenyans are able to familiarize themselves with the draft constitution your parliament passed and allow you to make informed decisions.  But, let me repeat, this is your decision, your decision alone.  And the people of Kenya must make this choice -- a choice for Kenya by Kenyans.
 
And as you prepare to write a new history for your nation, resist those who try to divide you based on ethnicity or religion or region -- and above all, fear is a tool as old as mankind, and it’s been used with great effect in this country in the past.  For too long -- for too long, opportunistic politicians have created an all-or-nothing system -- your group is either in or you’re out, and the resources of the state were treated as spoils for the winner, rather than the rightful birthright of the people of Kenya.
When this toxic brand of politics is taken to its logical extreme in Kenya’s post-election violence, the results, I think, shocked even all of you -- but it clearly shocked the world.  Now, Kenyans must make a deliberate and difficult choice -- to reject the divisive politics, to reconcile their communities, to acknowledge the injustice of the past so you do not harbor deep-seated resentment in the future.  This resolve requires a deep inner strength --strength you can, and should, derive from your diversity.
 
Turn Kenya’s youth into a source of innovation and vision.  Dare to reach for transformational change -- the kind of change that might come around only once in your lifetime.  I especially call on the young people -- the backbone of this country -- the next generation of Kenyan leaders.  Your energy is contagious, and your enthusiasm is boundless.  Your ideas and your voice can help create a peaceful, stable, democratic, and economically prosperous Kenya everyone here wants to see -- and, quite frankly, we want to see.
 
And you have a steadfast supporter in the United States.  The United States of America’s relationship with Kenya is among the most important on the continent for us, one that has been strong and uninterrupted since your independence.  Thousands of American Peace Corps volunteers have taught in your schools and villages.  Hundreds of American businessmen have worked in American companies that have built their regional headquarters in Nairobi or Mombasa.  And the U.S. government has established its largest embassy in sub-Saharan Africa in your capital.
 
In crisis and in celebration, we have forged a strong and enduring political and economic relationship.  We have worked together as partners and friends to tackle some of the most difficult problems in the region.  But true friendship -- and I hope you will forgive me, but true friendship demands honesty.  So if our words are sometimes blunt, it’s because our faith in the possibilities of Kenya are unlimited. 
Now, don’t get me wrong, I know from my personal experience, change is never easy.  And change in circumstances like yours is extremely difficult.  Fundamental change is never easy.  But I also know from personal experience that it’s possible.  I’ve seen it happen around the world.  As a young senator, I’ve stood in the capitals of Sarajevo and Pristina -- in the Balkans.  From the Balkans to the Middle East to Eastern Europe, I have seen dark paths transform, through the will of the people, to bring about brighter futures.
In the 1990s, I stood in Sarajevo, Bosnia, and in Pristina, Kosovo, and witnessed the god-awful carnage and the blood running in the rivers, the ethnic cleansing that we thought we’d never see again in Europe.  I saw the carnage and the hate.  I sat in refugee centers.  I sat in homes and heard about how neighbors who had been friends for years literally hacked one another to death in their backyards once Slobodan Milosevic’s ugly, ugly violence took hold.  The hate, it seemed to know no bounds.  And it seemed like it would never end. 
But, the people of those countries, they made a choice.  They ultimately rejected violence.  They drew a line on the past and today they are looking toward a future.  And they’ve given up their own vile criminals to the international courts, which is part of the reconciliation that was needed, acknowledging their individual responsibilities. 
It was a choice that not only is changing their future, but is changing the future of that entire portion of Europe.  And just one year ago, I was in Romania celebrating the 20th Anniversary of the fall of communism and the wall.  And I said then, “Now, we think of central Europe” -- “when we think of Central Europe, we don’t think of what we can do for you, but what we can do with you.”
My prayer is that very soon after you make these momentous changes that are needed, we’ll be talking about not what we can do for you, but what we can do with you, because you have begun to realize the great potential you possess.  The change is within your reach.  The same change that occurred in other parts of the world, including Iraq, can change here.
Ladies and gentlemen, nowhere is it written that the winds of change cannot blow through Africa -- nowhere is that written.  On December 12, 1963, a new day dawned on Kenya, one filled with promise for even better days ahead.  In the coming days and months, you have to -- the chance to build on that promise in a way you haven’t had for over three decades, to fulfill the dreams of everyone who watched that flag unfurl in that stadium 47 years ago.
 
And I want to close with some words that President Johnson used to end his letter to Prime Minister Kenyatta in 1963.  Here’s what he said -- he said, “May the responsibilities of freedom wake the best that is in you, and may its benefits be known by generations yet unborn.”  Well, I would say the same thing to you today.  
Asante sana.  May God bless you. (Applause.)  May God bless the Kenyan people.  (Applause.)  And may God bless America.  Thank you very much.  Don’t let your country down.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
11:23 A.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  June 08, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Statement to the Press with Kenyan President Mwai Kibaki
State House
Nairobi, Kenya
12:56 P.M. (local)
PRESIDENT KIBAKI:  I think we are all ready.  Members of the media, this morning we held very useful discussions with the visiting United States Vice President, the Honorable Joseph Biden, on a broad range of issues touching on both bilateral and regional matters.  In the meeting, the Kenyan side included the Right Honorable Prime Minister Raila Odinga, the Vice President, Honorable Kalonzo Musyoka, and some cabinet ministers. 
As a government, we are happy that Kenya and the United States enjoy extremely warm and friendly relations that go back to our independence.  Our meeting today, therefore, provided a welcome opportunity to review our bilateral relations and exchange the views on key issues of mutual interest in a candid and cordial atmosphere. 
I briefed the visiting U.S. Vice President of the important milestone that have covered -- that we have covered in implementing our reform agenda.  The referendum on a new constitution, scheduled for 4th August this year, is the most important reform initiative for the Grand Coalition Government.  We are confident that through this process, Kenyans will get a new constitution.
We have also expressed our appreciation for the U.S. support in many areas of cooperation, especially in health, agriculture, and security.  We have requested that assistance be extended to other sectors, including transport, housing, energy, and water.
We also requested the U.S. administration to encourage American investors to take advantage of the single East African Common Market that will become a reality next month.  The single market will also -- will allow free movement of people, goods, services, and capital throughout the five member countries that compromise -- Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi.
We also discussed other regional matters, including Somalia.  Stabilization of Somalia is a high priority in our common efforts to secure regional peace and stability.  Both the United States and Kenya are concerned about the growing acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia and the instability caused in Somalia by extremist groups.  This matter must be addressed with greater urgency.  We have asked the U.S. government to provide the leadership to forge a concerted international effort to stabilize Somalia. 
We also discussed present developments in Sudan, in the context of the implementation of the comprehensive peace agreement, of which both our governments are guarantors.  We have noted the recent elections in Sudan.  We expect that the referendum planned for January next year will take place as scheduled.  In our view, the best way of supporting Sudan’s internal stability, regional peace, and prosperity is to respect the verdict of the people, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum.       
At our meeting, we also appreciated the continued keen interest that President Barack Obama has continued -- has shown in Kenya.  We thank President Obama for his support, and count on his administration’s goodwill and cooperation.
Ladies and gentlemen, I now wish to invite the United States Vice President, Joseph Biden, to make his remarks.  I thank you very much. 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I am honored to be here in this beautiful country with such a rich and diverse culture and so many qualified leaders.  It’s great to see you all.  And thank you for giving me all the time you did this morning.
Mr. President and Mr. Prime Minister, I have had -- I think we’ve had some very productive discussions today and covering many interests, some of which you’ve mentioned, Mr. President.  But I must tell you, I was truly impressed by the mutual cooperation between you and the Prime Minister and your commitment -- your commitment to -- your mutual commitment to reform.
 
We reaffirmed our commitment to work together and to deepen Kenya’s democracy, and to strengthen the rule of law and advance the prospects for a peaceful, prosperous future.
 
We focused as well on the need to fully implement Kenya’s reform agenda, and the importance of the constitutional reform process.
 
And we share the wish of the people of Kenya for a peaceful constitutional referendum that unites Kenya and accelerates the implementation of these reforms.
 
As President Obama said in a recent interview, the upcoming constitutional referendum is, as he said -- and I quote -- "a singular opportunity to put Kenyan governance on a more solid footing that can move beyond ethnic violence, and move beyond corruption, [and] can move the country toward a path of economic prosperity."
 
And we talked a lot about economic prosperity.  Better governance is just not an end in itself -- it is a path to job creation and to a better economy.  Two-thirds of your citizens are under the age of 25, and they are an incredible source of strength.  But they also represent a challenge to create positive, creative, and productive outlets for their energy and enthusiasm in a prospering economy. 
And as Kenya moves forward, so too will the United States in strengthening our relationships with you, both economically and politically.  Kenya is already the largest recipient of U.S. support in sub-Saharan Africa.  Putting in place a new constitution and strengthening your democratic institutions with the rule of law will further open the door to major American development programs such as the Millennium Challenge and will, I predict, bring about reinvestment by American corporations and international organizations in Kenya that could provide millions of dollars in assistance in grants through the Millennium Challenge, as well as begin to further build the economy of this great country.
Reform is also -- will also encourage, as I said, new foreign investment and reinvigorate tourism.  As I told the President and Prime Minister, Americans want to do business here in Kenya.  I come from a state that is the corporate state of America.  I can tell you, when these reforms take place, you will find a completely different atmosphere about investment in this country.  Americans want to do business here, they want to travel here, and with the right climate they will come.    
And I’ve noticed, Mr. President and Mr. Prime Minister, when we invest, it has the tendency to generate additional investment -- additional investment from other parts of the world.  We see a prosperous Kenya in not only the interest of the Kenyan people -- and all of East Africa -- but in everyone’s interest.  And so we encourage -- with these reforms, when they occur, we encourage the investment -- and not just Americans, but everyone from around the world would like to see this country grow.
I also discussed the cooperation that we have underway and will continue in the shared challenges in the region, including Somalia and the Sudan. 
I assured the President and the Prime Minister that the United States supports Kenya’s effort to secure the border in the face of very real threats from those who wish to spread chaos through despair and violence.
We recognize that Kenya’s long term stability and development are tied to regional security and development, and the United States is committed to work with Kenya to achieve both those objectives.  And I look forward to speaking in more detail tomorrow about this partnership between the United States and Kenya, and my absolute conviction that Kenya’s best days are yet to come.
For today, let me simply say thank you to the President and the Prime Minister for their hospitality and for the very good exchange of ideas we had, and for making me more optimistic than I have been about the prospects of this reform occurring.  And I want to thank all of the cabinet members as well for the hospitality they’ve shown me and my delegation.  And I will have more to say about this in a major speech I’ll deliver tomorrow.
Thank you all very much, and thank you very much, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT KIBAKI:  Asante sana. 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.  Thank you very much. 
END
1:08 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 08, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Statement to the Press with Spanish President Zapatero
1:42 P.M. (local)
PRESIDENT ZAPATERO:  (As interpreted.)  I would like to welcome Vice President Biden most warmly to Spain, him and his delegation, and tell him how pleased we are, my government and myself, for this visit of the Vice President of the United States.  But, first of all, I would like to very briefly talk about our king.  I wish him a prompt recovery.  The operation has come out very well.  You know he is a very strong man and we are very assured, as we thought.
Vice President Biden, your presence in our country comes to prove that -- how things are right now in our relations between the United States and Spain.  Times are very positive, the times of cooperation in very different areas.  Today we’ve spent our meeting talking about essentially the economic evolution of the economy and the markets.  We’ve talked about the main areas in which Spain and the United States work together for international security, and also about our bilateral relations in other areas.
I’ve conveyed to Vice President Biden the analysis that the leaders of the euro zone made yesterday about their position regarding the situation in the markets.  International coordination has been one of the great lessons of the economic crisis that we’ve been undergoing since 2008.  The response to the difficulties and the problems must be one of unity, determination, and strength.  And that’s what we did yesterday in Europe.  And that is something that we are also going to do together with the major economic powers such as the United States and other regions.  That’s what the EU is working on.  That’s what the Spanish rotating presidency of the EU is working on.  And we trust that it may give positive results.   
We are extremely pleased that the U.S. economy is proving to be recovering and showing its vitality, because it’s decisive for the world’s economy -- it’s the first economic power in the world.  I’ve told Vice President Biden that economic recovery is underway in Europe and in the euro zone, and that it is key at the present time to overcome the crisis in the markets so as to keep up economic recovery and job creation. 
But we still have many tasks ahead of us, for example, the work that the coming G20 must do regarding the regulation of the financial system, the commitment of the major financial institutions in order for the crisis not to be paid by our taxpayers in the future, so that they themselves endow the necessary provisions and funds, and contribute those resources when faced with any possible future financial crises.  This is a lesson -- and the United States is working in that direction -- and that’s something we must do concertedly.  
You also know that economic relations between the United States and Spain are very strong.  The United States is a very important investor in Spain.  It has trust in Spain.  It has trust in Spain’s future, in its companies.  And there are more and more Spanish companies in the United States of America, most especially in renewable energies, and also in the areas of construction and specifically in the high-speed rail network.  And we are very happy with this growing commercial relationship.
Security, the major world’s security issues, I have reiterated to Vice President Biden the commitment to Spain with regards to international security, in counterterrorism as well, and in the peace processes to do away with conflicts.  I’ve also reiterated our commitment in Afghanistan, and I am grateful to Vice President Biden for his gesture to which we attach the greatest value of visiting Spanish soldiers who are going to be soon in Afghanistan in recognition of their mission.
We’ve talked about the Middle East as well, and about the need and advisability for the -- for the talks -- for the preliminary talks to make progress so as to have a future outlook of in-depth talks about peace.  And I’ve underscored my support to the Obama administration in the steps it has taken in the Middle East. 
The quartet -- the quartet is absolutely essential in order for these objectives to be achieved in the peace process, as is the cooperation between the European Union and the United States.  We’ve also talked about Iran, and about the international community’s required firmness so as to prevent an escalation of nuclear weapons.  There we are in full agreement, and we hope that there is one as well at the Security Council.  But Iran must know that it has nothing to do behind the backs of the international community; that it has to play by the rules of the international community. 
In a nutshell, relations with the United States and with the Obama administration are at present relations of full cooperation, mutual support, and confidence and trust.  And, thus, this visit is of great value.  I must say that Vice President Biden always honors his word.  We already knew that.  But he honors his promises, because he’s proven it with his visit.  He promised me he would come to a country that I know he admires, and a country that I hope makes him feel very much at home today and any other time he may want to come visit us.  And he will always be very welcome, Mr. Vice President.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I have only one regret on this trip -- is I have to go home, that’s my regret.  I think Spain is one of the magnificent countries.
And the President and I have had many conversations about my admiration for Spain and my desire to find some time, some way to come and spend a couple of months here.  I guess I have to wait to retire to do that.  But I would like very much to do that.
With regard to your king -- King Juan Carlos -- I had the opportunity to meet with him on several occasions way back when he addressed the Joint Session of the United States Congress back in the ‘80s, then again in the ‘90s.  And I had the great honor and privilege of meeting with him for an hour and a half or so yesterday.  And every time I see him, he reinforces what everyone in my country already knows about him, he is a man of absolute integrity.  But he is also a man of significant personal courage.
I did not know he was about to go in for this operation.  Thank God, it has turned out as well as it appears to have turned out.  But having gone under the knife, as they say, myself on a couple of serious occasions, the ability to sit there just several hours before we were going in to discuss matters of state and be greeted with such warmth and hospitality is -- does not surprise me, actually.  But we have great affection for the King, and I personally have great affection for him and wish him well in his recovery.
And, Mr. President, I want to thank you for what I think has always been the case with you and me, a very good and very open meeting we had a little bit earlier today.  I’m grateful for the warm reception you and, quite frankly, all of your colleagues have given me -- the Vice President, the Foreign Minister, your Secretary of Defense, your Minister of Defense.  It has been -- it has been a real pleasure to be here.
The day after the 2008 election in the States, the President was kind enough to give me a call and call President-elect Obama to offer his congratulations.  And he invited me to Spain, and I warned him that I would show up, because of, as I said, my deep affection and great admiration for your country and your people.
I cannot think of a time -- I have been a United States senator on the national scene since I’ve been 29 years of age.  And I am proud to say that I cannot think of a time when our relationship has been stronger, when there has been more mutual respect, and more serious cooperation and partnership.  The partnership seems to grow stronger every single day, and my country values that immeasurably and looks to Spain for its leadership in other areas of the world and its guidance in other parts of the world from Latin America, to Africa, to its continued cooperation in the Middle East, Afghanistan, around the world.
And so close allies -- close allies do things together and they do hard and important things together.  That’s what the United States and Spain are doing right now literally around the world.  Our soldiers are side by side in Afghanistan.  Our aid workers are joined in Haiti.  Our diplomats are collaborating closely from the Balkans to the Middle East.  And our government and citizens cooperate in more areas than I can or should enumerate right now, from promoting, as the President said, renewable energy -- and we look to you as a leader in the world in that area -- to food security and fighting global climate change and nuclear proliferation.
The President and I discussed many of these issues a little earlier and our collaboration in these areas.  And I thank the President for Spain’s decision to increase troops and trainers in Afghanistan. 
As valued NATO allies, we’re working to disrupt, dismantle and to defeat al Qaeda, to fight the insurgents who would destabilize Afghanistan -- and Pakistan for that matter -- and to develop institutions and Afghan security forces so that the Afghanis can take responsibility on their own in the near future. 
This mission has required real sacrifice, and the citizens of Spain understand that especially of our men and women in uniform and their families -- and I know it’s not popular to continue this effort.  On September 11th, and on March 11th, our citizens, at the hands of violent extremists who plot and plan from that region of the world, wrought real damage in each of our countries.  And, as leaders, we both agree we have an obligation to stop them and to protect the people we serve.
The President and I discussed the international effort to prevent Iran as well from acquiring nuclear weapons.  The European Union and the United States embarked on an unprecedented path of engagement with the Iranian leaders.  The President of the United States meant what he said when he took office to some criticism at home, that anyone who would reach out their hand and unclench their fist we were prepared to deal with.
We made it absolutely clear that we were prepared to deal with -- on an equal and equitable basis -- with the Iranian leadership.  But as the whole world now sees, they spurned our efforts and they continue to take actions that violate Iran’s obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, continue to threaten regional stability, continue to deny rights to their own citizens, and continue to support terror.  Now, Tehran faces a stark choice -- abide by international norms and rules and rejoin the community of responsible nations, or face further consequences and increasing isolation.
The President and I also spent time discussing the economic crisis that is focused on Greece and the efforts being made to address it.  We agreed on the importance of a resolute European action to strengthen the European economy and to build confidence in the markets.  And I conveyed the support of the United States of America toward those efforts and was pleased to hear the efforts that were underway on the part of the President. 
We also discussed economic developments in Spain and the prospects for your recovery.  And I congratulate the President for his leadership during the Spanish European Union’s presidency.  The United States simply appreciates the Spanish government’s support within the EU for the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program.  You have been a great ally, and you have -- you understand, as we do, the vital importance of that program.  But we also -- that program has provided critical leads to counterterrorism investigations on both sides of the Atlantic and disrupted plots, and ultimately saved lives. 
And I fully appreciate -- we, the President and I, fully appreciate the concerns some Europeans have raised relative to this program, concerns about privacy.  Europeans and Americans alike have valued greatly the privacy of our citizens.  Were we to make comprises on our civil liberties, that would be an admission the terrorists have already succeeded.
The President and I have in our careers prior to taking office here have been leaders in our country on protecting the civil liberties of Americans, and nothing, nothing, nothing we are doing -- nor the program is doing -- is intended to in any way jeopardize that.
So we are working with our Spanish friends and all of the European Union now to assuage any concerns about the program.  We are absolutely confident -- absolutely confident we will address these concerns and preserve the program that is vital to the security of all our citizens.
So, Mr. President, as President Obama and I have said many times, our greatest challenges are global in nature.  No country -- no matter how big, no matter how powerful, no matter how much they think they have knowledge of what should be done -- none, not one country, can solve any of these problems acting alone.  We need allies.  And we need Spain.  And I’m not being solicitous because I’m standing here with you, Mr. President, in these beautiful surroundings. 
We need you and we appreciate your leadership, and we view -- are truly grateful for your willingness to be such a great partner with the United States and within the European community.  And thank you for your leadership, Mr. President.  Thank you all. 
END
2:01 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 May 07, 2010
Remarks by The First Lady and Dr. Biden to the Women's Leadership Forum Issues Conference
Washington Hilton
Washington, D.C.
1:05 P.M. EDT
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you very much.  Thank you, Denise, for that warm introduction.  And thank you to the Women’s Leadership Forum conference hosts and organizers who have worked so hard to make this event possible.  It’s great to be with you here today. 
It’s been an incredible journey since the last time Michelle and I were with you in Chicago.  (Applause.)  I remember being so inspired by the tremendous spirit of the amazing women in that room -- women who played a critical role in the 2008 election.  There’s no question that we would not be here today without each of your efforts.  (Applause.)  No, I should thank you.  (Applause.)
No doubt, many things have changed since October of 2008.  But what brings us back here together today is our collective commitment to improving the lives of all Americans.
And I can tell you, all over this country, every day, women are making extraordinary efforts to improve their lives and the lives of others.
 
Last week, I met Carla Mannes at a community college meeting I was hosting in Arizona.  Carla is a single mom who spent the last 25-plus years raising four children, working around the clock and successfully putting them through school.  Over the years Carla tried to return to school herself, but the timing was never quite right.
She confessed to me that she thought of herself as -- she didn’t think of herself as very smart because she didn’t have a degree, and the last 10 years have really been a difficult financial struggle for her and her family. 
Last summer, Carla gave it another shot and enrolled in classes at her local community college, this time with an undeniable passion and commitment to finish.
Carla is on the path towards a degree in Social Work, and her goal is to mentor young women who feel unloved and discarded.
Last semester, Carla earned a 4.0.  (Applause.)
I also recently met two young women from California, Kaylei Deakin and Moranda Hern.  Both are high school seniors and daughters of National Guardsmen. 
Together, they formed the “Sisterhood of the Traveling Battle Dress Uniforms” -- (laughter) -- I know, it’s cute -- a support network for young women going through similar experiences of sadness and loss while their fathers and mothers are deployed.  But that wasn’t enough.  They went on to organize a conference for daughters of military members, focusing on issues ranging from self-esteem, self-image, career plans, and relationships.
I am profoundly moved by the women I meet, whether in my travels or in my classroom each day, by their determination to learn, and their quest to make a better life for themselves and their families.
And, I know we are all here today because we believe in the efforts of this administration, along with the dedication of groups like WLF, will support these women and their families.
And, speaking of incredible women, I am here to introduce a woman whom I am fortunate enough to call my friend, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
I really believe that fate brought the two of us together, and I am so grateful to have the opportunity to partner with Michelle on many of the critical issues facing this country today.
We all know that Michelle is a dedicated and devoted mother, wife, a brilliant lawyer, and a groundbreaking First Lady.  In the short time we have been in office, she has opened up the White House to tens of thousands of Americans and given new meaning to the phrase: “the People’s House.”
Both domestically and on the world stage, she is a role model and mentor to women and men alike.
Please join me in welcoming my dear friend, the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Wow.  (Applause.)  Well, hello!  (Applause.)  Thank you all so much.  Please.  (Applause.)  Thanks so much.  It is so good to see you all.  Thank you so much.  It is a pleasure to be here with all of you today. 
Let me begin by thanking Jill for that extremely kind introduction.  Jill has been such an extraordinary partner in our work to support military families.  More importantly she has been just a terrific friend in this journey.  It’s just been truly a thrill for me to have her by my side, sometimes in front.  So let’s give Jill another round of applause.  (Applause.)
I want to recognize a few more people.  I want to recognize our DNC Chair, Governor Tim Kaine.  Tim.  (Applause.)  And on this Mother’s Day he is here with his lovely wife and my dear friend, Ann, and his mom, Kathy.  (Applause.)  
And I also want to thank Senators Gillibrand and our DNC Vice Chair, Representative Wasserman-Schultz.  (Applause.)  Also to the outstanding Congresswoman Carol Maloney.  It’s good to see you, have you here.  (Applause.)  I don’t know where everyone is sitting, but they’re here.  And to the founding members and co-chairs of the Women’s Leadership Forum, I get a chance to hug and see all of you.  You are doing tremendous work.  We are grateful and proud of everything you’re doing.
So, now, some of you may remember that the last time we were together, as Jill said, it was back in late October of 2008.  You remember that?  (Applause.)  And you were all meeting in my hometown, Chicago.  And it was just -- (applause) -- it was good, it was really good!  (Applause.)  It was just a couple of weeks before the election, and Barack and I had been traveling, flying all over the country, everywhere, every corner, talking to folks and doing everything that we could to do to persuade people to get out the vote, and to vote for who?  Barack Obama.  (Laughter.)
But we were very eager to get back to home for the National Issues Conference, because we knew then about the critical work that you all were doing -- the organizing, raising money, making sure that people got to the polls on November the 4th.  Do you remember those times?  (Laughter.) 
Because of the tireless efforts of all you and folks like you all throughout the country, we saw people getting involved for the very first time.  Remember that?  We saw folks of all ages and backgrounds knocking on doors -- they had never done that before -- making calls, waiting hours in line on Election Day because they wanted to make history. 
And on November the 4th, 2008, that’s exactly what we did.  And my husband and I are so incredibly grateful for everything that you all did to make that possible.  We are truly proud of you for the work that you’ve done. 
But I think it’s fair to say that since that time a few things have happened to us.  (Laughter.)  As you know, our family moved from Chicago right here to Washington, our new hometown, although will never be not our hometown.  And we’ve spent the last year or so, as you know, just settling into our new lives here in this city.
So all of you know, the girls are doing great.  And Mom is doing well too.  She’s enjoying a very active life here in Washington.  And by the way, Bo is adjusting to his newfound celebrity -- (laughter) -- for those of you who care to ask.  He is probably the most important person in the household for kids who visit.
And after all that time on the campaign trail, I have to say that we’re enjoying living above the store -- (laughter) -- so that Dad can come home for nights -- for dinner.  And that’s something that we truly treasure.  It was something that we didn’t have for a long time on the campaign trail.
So a lot has changed since we last met.  But there’s one thing that hasn’t changed.  Back then I talked about the issues that we face -- from the economy, to health care, to education.  And I said that these issues aren’t and they still aren’t about politics.  They’re personal.  And they’re personal for every single one of us in this room, and they’re personal for every single one of us in this country. 
And it’s easy to lose sight of that fact with all the back and forth that goes on here in Washington -- folks yelling at each other on TV so that little things get blown out of proportion and sometimes big, important things don’t always get the attention that they deserve.
But I have to tell you that when Barack and I travel the country now and we spend time with ordinary folks, they don’t have much interest in the scorekeeping that goes on here in Washington.  They really don’t.  They don’t care much about anybody’s poll numbers.  And as my husband has pointed out, never -- not even once -- has someone asked him, “Who won the day?”
The questions they ask have nothing to do with the daily chatter that goes on here, and it has everything to do with the struggles, the real struggles they’re facing in their lives.  They tell us about insurance companies that refuse to pay for the treatment that they need, and they ask us, “What do I do now?”  Or they tell us, “I’ve been out of a job for months.”  And they ask, “What are you going to do to help folks like me?” 
They tell us about factories that are shutting their doors, schools that are failing their kids, and their struggles to try to afford their mortgages, tuition bills, a decent retirement.
And I know that a lot of folks are cynical about whether change is possible.  I know it’s hard.  A lot of folks think that everything that’s said out on the campaign trail is just talk.  They’re skeptical about whether the people they send to Washington will actually stand up for their interests and fight for their hopes and dreams.
But as all of you know, that is exactly what Barack Obama has done every single day since he’s been the President of the United States.  (Applause.) 
You all know that those folks that he met in Iowa and New Hampshire and across this country, they’re the folks that he thinks about when he wakes up every single morning.  They’re the ones that he fights for nearly every waking hour.  This man is working hard.
They are the basis for every decision he makes -- not whether it’s good politics, not whether it’s going to make good headlines, but whether it’s good for them and for their families.
During his campaign, he said clearly that he’d work to get our economy back on track so that businesses could start creating jobs again and families could get ahead. 
And that’s exactly what he’s doing.  During his first months in office, he worked to pass the Recovery Act and rescue our financial system from the brink of collapse. 
And while a lot of folks are still hurting, and they are, and we still have a long way to go, we are finally heading in the right direction. 
Our economy is growing again instead of shrinking.  (Applause.)  And because of the steps that were taken, 2 million Americans are working today who otherwise wouldn’t be. 
    
And about 95 percent of working folks in this country have received a tax cut –- money that they’re using to pay off their bills, and to pay down their mortgages, and to put food on the table for their families. 
Throughout this campaign, Barack promised that he would take on health care reform, because, as he said, it’s just plain wrong that so many folks have been dropped from their coverage when they got sick, or excluded because of pre-existing conditions, or crushed by outrageous costs. 
And guess what, that’s exactly what he did.  (Applause.)  Now, it wasn’t easy.  (Laughter.)  And it certainly wasn’t quick.  But because he stuck with it, and because you all stuck with him, we are finally able to pass a reform that’s going to offer families and small businesses the quality, affordable care that they deserve and they need.  
This reform doesn’t increase our deficits –- it actually helps shrink them.  It ends some of the worst abuses of the insurance industry.  It helps seniors pay for their prescriptions, and lets young people stay on their parents’ insurance until they’re 26. 
And it will give people the peace of mind of no longer having to worry that with just one accident, with just one illness, they’ll lose everything they have.  That’s what health reform is all about.  (Applause.)
My husband said he would fight to ensure that women got equal pay for equal work.  And as you may all remember, the very first bill he signed into law, just nine days after taking office -- I was there -– was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Restoration Act -- (applause) -- because, as he put it, and I quote, “There are no second class citizens in our workplaces.” 
My husband said that he would appoint judges to our courts who have a record of excellence, integrity, and independence, and who grasp not just the letter of the law, but its impact on our daily lives. 
And that is why Sonia Sotomayor is now making history as Justice Sotomayor in our nation’s highest court.  (Applause.)   
My husband said he’d fight to give every child in this country the education they need to thrive in today’s economy.  And that’s exactly what he’s doing.  He’s working to make college more affordable, to fix student loan systems so that it helps students, and not just banks. 
And his administration has launched a program, you may have heard of it, Race to the Top –- a nationwide challenge where states compete to transform their school and give our kids the chance in life that they deserve.
My husband said he would set a timetable for ending the War in Iraq, and step up the fight against terrorism. He said he’d work to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and lead the way on climate change, and begin restoring America’s standing in the world.  And let me tell you something, he’s done every single one of those things.  (Applause.)  Every single one of them.  (Applause.)
And I have seen the results first-hand.  I’ve seen it as I’ve traveled around the world, I’ve seen for myself the excitement and the enthusiasm that people are feeling towards our country.  It’s been a truly amazing and humbling experience.
Even with all the challenges that we’ve faced over the past year or so, and all the obstacles that we’ve had to overcome, we have achieved all of this –- and more –- in just the first 15 months.  It’s 15 months, all right?  (Applause.)
So if this is what we can do in 15 months -- did I say 15 months?  (Laughter.)  So just imagine what we can achieve in the next 15 months.  Just imagine what we can do in the next few years.  (Applause.)  See, it’s that kind of determination, that sense of possibility, that keeps Barack Obama going every day. 
And it’s why I’ve been inspired, as well, to use my platform as First Lady to work on issues that I care about that are near and dear to my heart.
That’s why I started our “Let’s Move” initiative to address the epidemic of childhood obesity that we’re seeing all across our country.  (Applause.)
No matter how many times I talk about the statistics, they never fail to take my breath away.  Right now, one in three children in this country is overweight or obese.  And one in three kids will suffer from diabetes at some point in their life. 
So if we’re spending $150 billion a year to treat obesity-related conditions today, just imagine how much we’ll be spending in 10, or 20, or 50 years if we don’t take action right now. 
Imagine the kind of lives our kids will be leading if so many of them are struggling with weight-related illnesses like diabetes and heart disease and cancer.
That’s why we’ve set such an ambitious goal for “Let’s Move”: to solve the problem of childhood obesity in a generation, so that children born today will reach adulthood at a healthy weight. 
We’re working with pediatricians, and food manufacturers, and the FDA to give parents the information they need to make healthy decisions for their kids. 
We’re making critical investments to get healthier food into our schools.  We’re working to eliminate “food deserts” by bringing grocery stores into underserved areas, so that all our families have access to healthy, affordable food right in their own community.  (Applause.)   
And to get kids moving, we’re revamping the President’s Physical Fitness Challenge and we're working with professional athletes to inspire kids to stay physically active not just in school but at home.
I know it’s an ambitious agenda, but we’re already starting to make progress.  Already school food suppliers have agreed to decrease sugar, fat and salt in school meals, and increase fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.  (Applause.)  Schools across the country are meeting our challenge to help kids eat right and exercise and make healthier decisions for themselves. 
State and local officials are sponsoring farmers markets and working to get more fresh foods into their communities.   
And we’re going to keep on working with folks from every part of this society -– mayors, governors, parents, educators, health care professionals -- you name it, because we're going to need every single one of them to help our kids lead active, healthy lives right from the beginning.
Young people are also the focus of my international agenda as well.  And last month, I made my first solo international trip.  Jill and I first went to Haiti, as you know, to offer support and encouragement for the ongoing relief efforts there.  And then I traveled to Mexico to urge young people to engage with their communities and help us meet the pressing challenges of our time. 
And I’ll never forget about a young woman that I met there named Maricela, who I met at a roundtable discussion with young leaders in Mexico City.  She was from a tiny town in Oaxaca.  Her father had passed away, and her mother -- she told a story of how she worked tirelessly to support her and her four siblings; said her mom was always the first one to wake up in the morning, and the last one to go to bed at night.  But she told us about the fact that despite their hardships, her mother was determined to build a better life for her daughter. 
She talked about something her mother told her -- said her mom told her, “It doesn’t matter…whether I sleep or not, but you have to be able to go to school.  That is the only way.  You have to be able to get an education.”
And the thing is, is that this is a story that is told every day all around the world, and right here in America -- a story about the strength and determination of women.  Women who haven’t had much in their own lives, but who know exactly what they want for their children.  Women who work those extra shifts, and make those sacrifices, so their daughters –- and their sons –- can have opportunities they never imagined for themselves.
I’m talking about women like Lilly Ledbetter, who I love, who you know she kept on fighting for equal pay even when she knew that it was too late for herself.  Why?  Because she wanted something more for the women who came after her.  That's the only reason she did it.  (Applause.) 
I’m talking about women like Dr. Dorothy Height, one of my heroes -- (applause) -- who kept up the fight for civil and economic rights up through the final months of her life.  She once said, and I quote, it’s a beautiful quote:  She said, “I want to be remembered as someone who used herself and anything she could touch to work for justice and freedom...I want to be remembered as someone who tried.”
And every day, across this country, so many women wake up every day and try -– using everything they have –- to make life a little better for others. 
And that’s what all of you all are doing with your work for our party -– using what you have to help build a better world for our kids and our grandkids.  And let me tell you something.  We desperately need all of you to stay involved in this work.  You cannot stop -- because we all know that when you need something done, and you ask women to do it, it gets done.  End of story.  (Applause.)   
And in the months leading up to this November and beyond, we’re going to need you to get out there and get it done, because we know that change -- we do know that change doesn’t happen overnight.  We know that progress doesn’t happen without struggle and sacrifice.  This stuff is supposed to be hard.  It takes folks like you, folks who are constantly rejecting the cynicism, casting aside the doubts, and working day after day to continue what we’ve already started. 
And that brings me back to something else that we talked about when we were together back in 2008.  Back then, and all throughout the campaign, I talked about my girls and how they’re the heart of my heart, and the center of my world, how they’re the first thing I think about when I wake up in the morning, and the last thing I think about when I go to bed at night.  It’s still true.  And because of the work that all of you are doing, let me tell you something, when I tuck them into bed at night, I feel so hopeful about the future we’re leaving for them, and for kids like them all across this country. 
I feel hopeful.  I feel like we’re on our way to leaving them a safer, healthier, freer, and more just world, one where they’ll have the opportunities more than ever before to fulfill their dreams. 
So I want to end by just saying thank you.  Thank you for everything you’ve done, for everything that you’re doing, and for everything we're going to need you to do in the months and years ahead.  We are proud of you.  So let’s get it done.
Thank you all so much.  (Applause.) 
END
1:33 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  May 06, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden to the European Parliament
12:30 P.M. (local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you for that welcome.  It was a delight to have you in Washington and at the White House.  And it’s a great honor -- and I might add, a privilege -- to be able to address such an esteemed body.  I served in a parliament that only had 535 members total.  This is even a greater honor. 
When President Reagan -- I remember President Reagan’s speech here in 1985, and to quote an Irish poet, William Butler Yeats, speaking of his Ireland in a poem called “Easter Sunday, 1916” he said, “All has changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.”  Much has changed since 1985.  Much has changed, and a terrible beauty has been born. 
As you already know, ladies and gentlemen, not only am I pleased to be back here in Brussels for the second time as Vice President -- as you probably know, some American politicians and American journalists refer to Washington, DC as the “capital of the free world.”  But it seems to me that this great city, which boasts 1,000 years of history and which serves as the capital of Belgium, the home of the European Union, and the headquarters for NATO, this city has its own legitimate claim to that title.
 
As a lawmaker for more than 36 years in our Parliament, I feel particularly honored to address the European Parliament.  President Obama and I were the first running mates in the last 50 years in America to make it to the White House from our legislative bodies.  So we both come to our executive jobs with a deep appreciation for the work you do here in the bastion of European democracy.
 
Together with my former colleagues in the United States Congress, you and I represent more than 800 million people.  Stop and think about that for a moment:  two elected bodies that shape the laws for almost one-eighth of the planet’s population.  That’s truly remarkable.
 
And now under the Lisbon Treaty, you’ve taken on more powers and a broader responsibility that comes with that increased influence.  And we welcome it.  We welcome that, because we, the United States, need strong allies and alliances to help us tackle the problems of the 21st century, many of which are the same but so many are different than the last century. 
Let me state it as plainly as I can:  The Obama-Biden administration has no doubt about the need for and strongly supports a vibrant European Union.  We believe it’s absolutely essential to American prosperity and long-term security.  So have no doubt about that.
 
When I chaired the United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee for all those years, I had the opportunity to meet many European lawmakers from the national legislative bodies, including some of you who are in this room today.  So I appreciate -- after all those years, I appreciate what a consequential step it has been to build the only multinational parliament in the world elected by universal suffrage.  So much has changed.
 
And I’m pleased that through the -- through the Transatlantic Legislators’ Dialogue, you are building a strong relationship with the United States Congress.  And I hope that the office you opened in Washington last month is going to enhance those ties.
 
Folks, 65 years ago this week, less than 200 kilometers south of here, Nazi leaders signed an unconditional surrender that brought an end to the Second World War in Europe. 
The next day, celebrations erupted in Times Square and Piccadilly Circus.  Cheering crowds danced along the Champs-Elysees and the town squares throughout the Allied world.  And here in Brussels, a thanksgiving service -- at a thanksgiving service, churchgoers sang the national anthems of Britain, Belgium, and the United States.
 
On that joyous day -- May 8, 1945 -- this continent lay in ruins, ravaged twice by total wars in less than 30 years.  At that moment, a peaceful and united Europe, a European Parliament, must have seemed like a fantasy to anyone alive.
 
     And yet, through the will of your fellow citizens and statesmen like Jean [sic] Henri Spaak, for whom this great hall is named, and Robert Schuman, and Jean Monnet, and the visions that gave birth to a Parliament and earned him the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Lyndon Johnson, here we are assembled in this hall.  Here you are.
 
What began as a simple pact among a half-a-dozen nations to create a common market for coal and steel grew into an economic and political powerhouse; a community dedicated to free thought, free movement, and free enterprise; a Europe that one historian has called, not so much a place but an idea.
 
And I’m here to reaffirm that President Obama and I believe in this idea, and in a better world and better Europe it has already helped to bring about; a Europe where all member states benefit by negotiating trade agreements and fighting environmental degradation with one unified voice; a Europe that bolsters the cultural and political values that my country shares with all of you; a Europe that is whole, a Europe that is free, and a Europe that is at peace.  (Applause.)
 
As President Obama said in Prague a little more than a year ago, a strong Europe makes a stronger partner for the United States, and we need strong partners.  That is why we will do everything we can to support this great endeavor of yours.  Because the past 65 years have shown that when Americans and Europeans devote their energies to common purpose, there is almost nothing we are unable to accomplish.
 
Together, through the Marshall Plan, we rebuilt Europe and made perhaps the greatest investment in human history.  Together, we built the most the world’s most enduring security alliance, NATO, and a military and political force that tied America and Europe together and brought us even closer in the ensuing decades. 
Together, we established the greatest commercial relationship in the world’s history, comprising about 40 percent of global trade and helping usher in an era of unprecedented prosperity and technological innovation.  And together, we have provided relief and hope to those suffering humanitarian catastrophes in more places than I can mention, from the Western Balkans, to the Congo, to our ongoing work in Haiti today.
 
To those skeptics who, in spite of all these accomplishments, continue to question the state of transatlantic relationships or my country’s attitude toward a united Europe, my answer is this:  Even if the United States and the nations all of you represent were not united by shared values and common heritage of many millions of our citizens, myself included, our global interests alone would inexorably bind us together.
 
The relationship between my country and Europe is today as strong, and as important, as all of us -- to all of us as it has ever been.  This century has unleashed new challenges no less dangerous than those that came before in the 20th century.  And together -- together we are taking them on one by one.  They are difficult.  There will be disagreement.  But we are taking them on jointly. 
Climate change, one of the greatest threats our planet faces, the United States and Europe are working to ensure that all countries, and especially the major economies, are contributing to a global solution.  We all look -- we all looked to and we did take a major step forward in Copenhagen.  Now we have to carry out those emission cuts, the financing, and the transparency called for in that accord.  And we must help the most vulnerable nations -- from the Arctic north to the Pacific islands -- that are the harbingers of this looming crisis. 
Across the troubled landscape of Afghanistan and Pakistan, we are working together to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and the Taliban fighters and to train an Afghan army and police force, so that their government can eventually protect its own people and not be a threat to its neighbors. 
 
In order to build Afghanistan’s governing capacity, the United States, the European Union, and its member nations are deploying significant financial resources and civilian resources as well.
 
While sustaining these important missions has not always been popular, you all know as I do it is required.  As leaders, we have an obligation to make the case to our populations that it is necessary for our collective security.  Although believe me, as a politician who has stood for office for the last 38 years, I understand it is not easy.  I assure you, it is no more popular in my country than it is in any one of yours.
     That is also why the United States and Europe are standing side-by-side to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, a development that would endanger the citizens and menace its neighbors, including some of our closest allies.
 
Together -- together we embarked on an unprecedented path of engagement with the Iranian leaders.  (Applause.)  And, ladies and gentlemen, despite what some skeptics thought, the President meant what he said, that we will reach out our hand to any party that will unclench their fist.  At the outset of this administration, President Obama stated that we are prepared to deal with Iran on the basis of mutual interest and mutual respect.
 
With our allies, we’ve made clear to Iran’s leaders how they could begin to rebuild confidence within the international community, including by granting access to their previously undeclared enrichment facilities and exchanging low enriched uranium for fuel to power a research reactor.
 
But, as the world has now watched and seen, Iranian leaders spurned our collective good-faith efforts and continue to take actions that threaten regional stability.
 
Let me be state it flatly:  Iran’s nuclear program violates its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and risks sparking a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.  Wouldn’t it be ironic -- wouldn’t it be ironic as the Iron Curtain fell and the mutual threats of nuclear destruction diminished among the superpowers that a new arms race would emerge in some of the most unstable parts in the world.  That would be an irony that our children and our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren would not forgive us, in my view, for allowing it to come to pass. 
In addition, the Iranian leadership supports terrorist organizations and that support continues unabated.  And it continues unconscionably to persecute those of its citizens who peaceably take to the streets in a quest for justice, a betrayal of the duty of all governments in terms of what they owe their citizens.
 
Tehran faces a stark choice: abide by international rules and rejoin the community of responsible nations, which we hope for, or face further consequences and increasing isolation.
 
In the face of the threat Iran poses, we are committed to the security of our allies.  That is why we’ve deployed the phased, adaptive missile defense program to deter and defend against missile attacks on this continent -- on this continent.  (Applause.) 
 
And, ladies and gentlemen, we are also working together inside NATO to prepare for a range of future security threats, including energy security and cyber security.  And we continue to support close security cooperation between NATO and the EU.
 
Last year, the United States and Europe acted quickly and decisively when the world was reeling from a financial crisis more dire than any since the Great Depression.  And in doing so, collectively we helped prevent what people were predicting, the total collapse of the world economy.
 
And today, President Obama and I are closely following the economic and financial crisis in Greece and the European Union’s efforts to deal with it.  We welcome the support package that Europe is considering, in conjunction the International Monetary Fund.  And we will be supportive both directly and through the IMF of your efforts as you rescue Greece.
 
These examples and many others I could have mentioned show why Europe continues to be not just America’s largest trading partner, but our most important ally. 
Ladies and gentlemen, our predecessors came together more than six decades ago this week to begin building institutions designed to ensure that the 21st [sic] century’s darkest chapters would not be repeated in the remainder of that century or in the 21st century.  Those institutions -- this institution -- have been a great success.  But now we have to set our sights on the challenges of this new century, I referenced in the beginning.  “The world has changed, changed utterly.  A terrible beauty has been born.”
Perhaps the most complex threat we face today is that posed by -- to our own citizens by non-state actors and violent extremists, particularly if, God forbid, those violent extremists were able to get their hands on any weapons of mass destruction.
 
This scourge has no respect for borders, none.  No single nation, no matter how strong or how wealthy, how organized or how capable, can meet this threat alone.  It can only be successfully contained if we make common cause.  And that’s precisely what we must do.
 
The new powers granted to this Parliament in the Lisbon Treaty give you a greater role in that struggle and a greater imperative to govern responsibly.
 
The U.S. government and this Parliament have struggled over how best to protect citizens without yielding the foundational rights on which all of our societies are built.  I am absolutely confident that we must and can both protect our citizens and preserve our liberties.
 
Since taking office last year, President Obama and I have been guided by our Constitution’s -- and our Constitution’s imperative to seek a “more perfect union.”
 
Toward that end, one of our first official actions was to end the interrogation practices that produced few results and that we could not, in good conscience, continue.  (Applause.)
 
We ordered the closure of the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, which had become a symbol of injustice and a rallying cry for terrorists.  And we appreciate -- (applause) -- and we appreciate the support, difficult it has been for you to take, so many of you have provided in that effort.
 
We did these things because like you, President Obama and I reject the false choice between safety and our ideals.  We believe that upholding our principles only makes us stronger and that compromising them then actually undermines our effort in the broader struggle against violent extremism.  For what is their purpose?  Their purpose is to change what we value, change how we conduct ourselves.
 
Eight days after the September 11th attack, I told a group of thousands of university students in my country that they cannot allow the tragedy of 9/11 to end our way of life, because that’s exactly what the terrorists sought.  I also told them that America cannot prevail in this new struggle by acting alone.  Those words have not only fit the tenor of that time, but I think they’ve proven to be true.  And they are no less true today.
 
I don’t need to tell this audience about Europe’s proud tradition of protecting citizens from government invasion of their privacy, a commitment grounded in respect for the inherent dignity of all people.  We call them inalienable rights.  We wrote them into our Constitution. 
And America’s commitment to privacy is also profound, as profound as yours.  Our Constitution’s Fourth Amendment protects individuals against unreasonable search and seizures by the state, which as one of our most famous jurists -- which one of our most famous jurists once dubbed, “the right to be let alone.”  The Supreme Court of the United States has made clear that privacy is a constitutionally protected and fundamental right.  And like the EU, the Supreme Court has characterized this right as a matter of personal “dignity.”
 
On a personal level, I have for 36 years of my career defended privacy rights in the United States Senate every year, as organizations that rate those most committed to civil liberties.  And every year, I -- and later President Obama -- were characterized as one of those four people picked.  The reason I bother to tell you this is not about me, but about the commitment of our administration to individual rights.  To change now would make a lie of everything I have said I stood for in my country for the past 37 years. 
When I led the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is responsible for confirming the President’s judicial nominees, as I said, I was consistently ranked among the staunchest advocates for civil liberties.  And I made it a priority to determine prospective judges’ views on privacy before deciding whether or not they could go on the court. 
 
But President Obama and I also believe that governments’ primary and most fundamental and most solemn duty is to protect its citizens, the citizens it serves, as well as the rights they hold.
 
President Obama has said that keeping our country safe is the first thing he thinks about when he wakes up in the morning and the last thing he thinks about before he goes to bed at night.  I suspect that is how every world leader looks at their role. 
 
Indeed, no less than privacy, physical safety is also an inalienable right -- physical safety is also an inalienable right.  And a government that abdicates its duty to ensure the safety of its citizens violates their rights no less than a government that silences dissidents or imprisons accused criminals without trial.
 
     And so, folks, even -- even as we gather here today, our enemies are employing every tool they can muster to conduct new and devastating attacks like the ones that struck New York, London, Madrid, and many other places around the globe.
 
To stop them, we must use every legitimate tool available -- law enforcement, military, intelligence, technology -- that’s consistent with our principles, our laws, and our values.  We’re fighting on many fronts, from the brave men and women serving abroad in our militaries to the patient and tireless law enforcement professionals investigating complex and suspicious financial networks. 
Just this week, our customs and border protection -- using passenger information data -- apprehended a suspect in the attempted bombing of New York’s Times Square, as he sought to flee the country.
 
It is vital that we maintain every capacity we have under the law to stop such attacks. 
 
And for that reason, we believe that the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program is essential to our security, as well as to yours -- presumptive of me to say.  It has provided critical leads to counterterrorism investigations on both sides of the Atlantic -- disrupting plots and ultimately saving lives.  It is built -- it has built-in redundancies that ensure personal information is respected and used only for counterterrorism purposes.  But I don’t blame you for questioning it. 
 
We understand your concerns.  As a consequence, we are working together to address them and I’m absolutely confident that we can succeed, to both use the tool and guarantee privacy.  It’s important that we do so, and it’s important that we do so as quickly as possible.
 
As a former United States Senator, I also know how hard it can be to make the hard choices required by global challenges, while staying true to local values.  All of you are going through that every time you vote in this Parliament, I suspect.
 
The longer we are without an agreement on the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program, the greater the risk of a terrorist attack that could have been prevented.  As leaders, we share a responsibility to do everything we can within the law to protect the 800 million people we collectively serve.
 
We have disagreed before.  We will surely disagree again.  But I’m equally convinced that the United States and Europe can meet the challenges of the 21st century, as we did in the 20th century if we talk and listen to one another, if we are honest with one another.  (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, “courage,” Winston Churchill taught us, “is what it takes to stand up and speak. Courage is also what it takes to sit down and listen.”  While this afternoon I have done all of the speaking, be assured that I -- my government and my President -- that we are back in the business of listening -- listening to our allies.
Ladies and gentlemen, it was no accident that Europe was my first overseas destination as Vice President, and also the President’s.  It is no accident that we’ve already returned several times since then.  The United States needs Europe.  And, I respectfully submit, Europe needs the United States -- we need each other more now than we have ever.  (Applause.)
 
So I view this week’s anniversary as providing a welcome opportunity to reaffirm the bond our peoples forged long ago in the fires of adversity.  Now, as then, in the pursuit of ideals and in the search of partners, Europeans and Americans look to each other before they look to anyone else.
 
Now, as then, we are honored and grateful to be by your side in the struggles yet to come.  So, again, I’m here to state unequivocally, President Obama and Joe Biden strongly support a united, a free, an open Europe.  We strongly support what you are about here.  We wish you god speed.  And may God bless you all and may God protect all of our troops.  Thank you very, very much.  (Applause.)
END
12:58 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the First Lady
 April 13, 2010
Remarks by the First Lady and Dr. Biden at Thank You Event
UN Logistical Center
Port-au-Prince, Haiti
3:22 P.M. (Local)
DR. BIDEN:  Thank you Mr. Mulet for that introduction, for hosting us on this important visit, and for the ongoing leadership that you and the United Nations team have provided here in Haiti.  And good afternoon and thank you to everyone gathered here today.
It’s truly an honor to be with all of you –- individuals from across the world, along with many Haitians, who have been at the core of the relief and the recovery efforts.
I am honored to be with you today and want to simply say thank you for your heroic actions in recent months.  Your commitment and compassion in the face of unthinkable challenges has inspired the entire world.
Some of your very own here have lost lives, others have risked their lives, and all of you have made us incredibly proud with your determined efforts to save men, women and children –- to provide comfort, and to put Haiti on a path to a brighter future.
All of you in this room know that the devastation in Haiti was unconceivable, and that there is much work to be done.  But after visiting for just a day, I will leave with a renewed sense of hope and optimism because of the will of the Haitian people and the steadfast commitment of those of you standing here today and the international community you represent.
As a teacher, I was especially pleased to visit a school this morning that is providing a sense of normalcy and hope for the children in this area.  And I spoke with Mrs. Préval about the importance of a strong education system to provide young Haitians the chance at a better life.
I also saw rebuilding efforts that will result in more schools.  And with the leadership of the Haitian government, your help and that of the international community, I know these schools will educate Haiti’s future leaders of government, arts, science and business.
Each of you is essential to these efforts.  There is much hard work ahead.  But I know that together with the leadership of the Haitian people, the commitment of the global community, and the ongoing sweat and compassion of those in this room today, we will help Haiti build back better.  (Applause.)
The First Lady and I came here to listen and learn, but also to deliver a sincere and simple message:  Thank you for what you have done and what you will do for this ongoing mission.
I am honored to join First Lady Michelle Obama for this meaningful visit to Haiti.
The President asked Michelle to come here to reiterate the commitment of the United States to Haiti as a steadfast partner, and he could not have asked a more able, dedicated, or compassionate person to deliver this message on behalf of the United States.
I am so proud -- (applause) -- I am so proud and honored to introduce my friend, and a woman we are so fortunate to call our First Lady:  Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)
MRS. OBAMA:  Well, thank you.  Thank you, all.  First let me start by thanking my friend, Jill -- Jill and her husband, that character you know, Vice President Biden, for all that they’ve done over these past few months, especially in support of our wonderful Haitian American communities, in South Florida and across the United States.  Let’s give Jill and Vice President Biden another round of applause.  (Applause.)
And also to Ed Mulet, to David Harland, to Nigel Fisher, General Cruz, and all the United Nations personnel who are here today, thank you.  Thank you for hosting us.  This has been an incredibly warm welcome.  It’s been an incredibly informative visit.  And I want to thank you all for your remarkable service under truly extraordinary circumstances, by any measure.
The mission to help Haiti recover and rebuild is truly, as Dr. Biden said, an international effort -- an international effort that is here at the invitation of the Haitian government and in support of -- by the Haitian people.
And we’re joined today by representatives from many countries, international institutions and NGOs who are playing a vital role in this rebuilding effort.  It is truly an honor to be here with all of you.
This has been a deeply moving day for Jill and I, a very emotional day in so many ways.  And Jill and I first and foremost were grateful for the opportunity to be able to -- sat down with President Préval and the First Lady.  We again expressed to them, as Jill said, America’s deepest condolences, first of all, to the Haitian people for this terrible and tremendous loss.
My husband, the President, asked that we remind President Préval and the people of Haiti that we are going to keep standing with them.  That is for sure.  (Applause.)
So I repeated to President Préval the pledge that my husband made to him at the White House during his visit last month -- that is, as Haiti recovers and rebuilds, you will have a steady and reliable partner in the United States of America.
We had the opportunity also to visit some of the places that reflect the enormous needs of the Haitian people, but also it reflects their amazing strength and resilience.
We visited families living in the tent cities in Champs De Mars -- families who’ve lost everything, everything, and for whom every day is a struggle to stay dry, to feed their children.
We visited a school -- more so, a classroom in buses donated by the Dominican Republic -- where some truly amazing kids were rebuilding and playing and dancing and laughing, even under the circumstances.
We also visited a school that is being rebuilt so that children can realize their dreams of an education and a better life.
We just had a very moving visit at our U.S. embassy with Ambassador Merten, our embassy staff -- Americans as well as Haitians.  They have worked so hard for the past three months.  And some of the civilian and military personnel who’ve been part of the Americans’ contribution to this international effort, we got to spend some time with them.
And like so many of you, they lost colleagues and friends and loved ones.  And our purpose for these visits was to mainly say thank you -- to thank them for their extraordinary service and for delivering on America’s enduring commitment to Haiti.
But we wanted to come here today because, as I said, helping Haiti recover and rebuild has been an international effort.
And those of you here -- those of you here at the United Nations, our many partner nations, these incredibly -- incredible NGOs have really been at the heart of this huge undertaking.
And all of you have displayed such a spirit of compassion and partnership that, frankly, we could use a whole lot more of in the world today.  You all are showing us all how it’s done.
You’ve done this even though so many of you have endured heartbreaking losses yourselves.
Here at the U.N, you lost Hédi Annabi and so many leaders and colleagues and members of the Stabilization Mission.
For the U.N., I understand it has been the single largest loss of life in history.  For each of you, it was the loss of a co-worker, a friend, a fellow peacekeeper.  For those of you in the NGO community, I know that the loss was just as devastating -- friends and partners and neighbors who you worked with every day.
And as we mark the three-month anniversary of this terrible day, I’d like to ask us all to just take a moment of silence to honor all those that we’ve lost.
(There is a pause for a moment of silence.)
We honor every single one of these victims -- people from dozens of nations.
And every day that each of you gets up and go back to work and into the communities that you love, you should know that you’re not only carrying on their work, you’re also honoring their lives and you’re keeping their legacy alive.  So please don’t ever forget that in these times of struggle.
And despite all your loss, you have shown amazing courage and commitment, especially in those first hours and those first days.
One of the first Secretary Generals of the U.N. famously said that the U.N. -- and this is a quote -- was “not created in order to bring us to heaven, but in order to save us from hell.”   And that’s just what you did for so many people here.  You saved them from devastation that was nothing like it on Earth.
You’ve worked around the clock, day after day, clearing rubble, and building shelters, and delivering food, and water, and medicine and supplies to millions of people.  And you’ve done this all with a true spirit of partnership.
Yes, the United States is proud to play a leading role in this effort.  But let’s never forget that this has been one of the largest and most complex relief operations the world has ever attempted -- the world.  And in one way or another, more than 140 nations has helped to make this a reality.
General Peixoto and peacekeepers from dozens of nations restored security so the relief effort could proceed.
And when more peacekeepers were needed, nations around the world stepped up -- especially Brazil, even though it too lost so many in the quake.
And because you live and work in the communities that you serve, those of you in the NGOs were often the first ones on the scene, providing food, and medical care and shelter under nearly impossible conditions.
And I want to salute these inspiring organizations, especially all the Haitian NGOs -- Haitians serving Haitians.  (Applause.)
And so much of your work would be impossible without the generous support of Haitians living abroad, including in the United States.  (Applause.)
To all these NGOs that you all represent, you represent them with the best spirit of service.  And I commend you for joining forces, and working together, and pursuing a common vision of reconstruction.  And as Haiti recovers and rebuilds, you’re going to be indispensable, and America is going to be your partner, too.
So this has truly been a global effort -- an amazing example of what nations and what people can do when they come together to do what’s right.
The road ahead, as you know, is not going to be easy.  And it’s not going to be quick.  As you know, the rainy season is coming soon; it is here.  The hurricane season is coming, too.
But I heard a wonderful Haitian proverb that puts this all in perspective.  And some of you probably know it.  It says, “Little by little, the bird builds its nest.”
And today, the needs of the Haitian people are still overwhelming.  We know that.  I saw that firsthand.  But every day -- and thanks to Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s unprecedented Humanitarian Appeal -- this international effort is bringing more supplies and more shelter so that little by little, daily life will improve.
President Préval and the Haitian government have been working under unimaginable difficulties.  But they have a vision for the future and they have a roadmap to get there.  So little by little, Haiti will move forward.
The destruction is catastrophic.  But last month, the world came together -- dozens of nations, including the United States; the U.N. and other international institutions; and NGOs -- and they made an historic commitment to Haiti’s long-term reconstruction.  So little by little, Haiti will rebuild.
Now, some might ask, after so much misery, how can we still have faith?  After so much ruin, how can Haiti rise again?  After so much loss, how on Earth can you still have hope?
Well, we have hope because we’ve been inspired -- inspired by the resilience and the faith of the Haitian people -- (applause) -- people who have lost everything, except their belief that tomorrow can be a little bit better than today.
And we have hope because the people of Haiti are not alone.  America is standing with Haiti.  (Applause.)  The world is standing with Haiti.  You are all standing with Haiti.  And your commitment and dedication to this country is truly inspiring.
It’s the commitment reflected in an e-mail that I received from one of your embassy staff before I came for this visit, Sonia Kim, who I just got to meet.  And I think that her beautiful words speak to the commitment that all of you bring to this work, wherever you’re from, whatever language you speak.
She wrote:  “We are exhausted, traumatized and heart-broken.  But we choose to stay here and work.  We choose to stay because we love Haiti and its people.  We choose to stay because we believe in our duty to help the people here in their greatest hour of need.  We choose to stay because we believe in our mission.  We choose to stay because we still hold out hope…for recovery and renewal…and for a Haiti built back better than ever before.”
And that’s why I came here today.  (Applause.)  That’s why we have hope.  And that’s why, little by little, we’re going to keep making tomorrow better than today.
Thank you for your incredible service.  We are so proud of you.  The world is proud of you.  The world is watching.  And we wish you nothing but the best.  God bless.  Thank you so much. Applause.)
END
3:38 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
 March 30, 2010
Remarks by the President and Dr. Jill Biden at Signing of Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act
11:04 A.M. EDT
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Fired up!
THE PRESIDENT:  Fired up!  (Laughter.)
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Obama!  (Laughter.)   
DR. BIDEN:  Good morning, everyone, and thank you for being here today.  I’m Jill Biden and I am honored to be a community college instructor. (Applause.)  I have been a teacher for almost three decades and a community college instructor for the past 16 years.  In fact, I’m an English teacher right here on this campus.  (Applause.)  It’s my great pleasure to welcome you all to Northern Virginia Community College.  (Applause.) 
Last week, our President signed an historic health care bill that will provide quality, affordable medical care for millions of Americans.  (Applause.)  Today we are here to celebrate another historic piece of legislation -- one that will make a college education a reality for millions of middle-class Americans.  (Applause.) 
All of us here today know that higher education is essential to the success of our children and vital to the economic future of our country.  But too many American families, they’ve had to take on crushing debt to pursue a college degree.  I see every day in my classroom just how hard my students work in order to pay their tuition bills.  Often their family budgets are stretched to the limit.  And when things get tough -- someone loses a job or a family member gets sick -- a college education is the first thing to go.
Thanks to the leadership of President Obama, our Vice President, and members of Congress here today, families across the country will find it a little easier to get to college and stay in college.  (Applause.)   
I am pleased to say that the reforms in this bill will make a huge difference to those Americans who need it most.  The expansions in Pell Grants will provide critical financial support to millions of middle-class Americans who are struggling with the costs of college.  The caps on student loan repayments will ensure that our students don’t go broke because they chose to pursue a college education.  And I am particularly thrilled that this bill invests in community colleges across our country so that more students can gain the knowledge and technical job skills that they need to compete and succeed.
I have seen firsthand the power of community colleges to change lives and serve as a gateway to opportunity for students at all stages of their lives and careers.  This bill increases investments in community colleges around the country to help these institutions do what they do best -- prepare our students for the workforce of today and tomorrow.
The President has set an ambitious goal for higher education in this country.  By 2020, we want America once again to have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.  (Applause.)  To make this happen, we’ll need to invest in these students and invest in the colleges that they will attend.
The bill that President Obama will sign here today is a huge step forward toward meeting our goal.  I can't think of a better investment in America’s future.
I’m proud to be here as a community college instructor, and I am especially proud and honored to introduce a President who is making higher education a reality for millions more Americans.
Please welcome President Barack Obama.  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Alexandria!  Thank you very much. (Applause.)  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, everybody.  (Applause.)  Please, have a seat.
Thank you, Dr. Biden, for that outstanding introduction and for putting up with Joe.  (Laughter.)  I want to also thank Dr. Biden for being one of the thousands of instructors all across the country who make such a difference in the lives of students each and every day.  So we are very proud of you for that.  (Applause.)
I want to thank President Templin and the entire NOVA Community College family for hosting us here today -- you can applaud for that.  (Applause.)
On stage we’ve got a couple of my outstanding Cabinet members:  Secretary Sebelius and Secretary Arne Duncan -- please give them a big round of applause.  (Applause.)  In the audience we’ve got Secretary Salazar of Interior; Secretary Donovan of HUD; and Ambassador Ron Kirk, our U.S. Trade Representative -- please give them a big round of applause.  (Applause.)
To all the outstanding members of Congress who made this day possible -- and I'm going to mainly single out the amazing Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi.  (Applause.) 
Today, we mark an important milestone on the road to health insurance reform and higher education reform.  But, more broadly, this day affirms our ability to overcome the challenges of our politics and meet the challenges of our time.
When I took office, one of the questions we needed to answer was whether it was still possible to make government responsive to the needs of everyday people, middle-class Americans, the backbone of this country; or whether the special interests and their lobbyists would continue to hold sway, like they’ve done so many times before.  And that’s a test we met one week ago, when health insurance reform became the law of the land in the United States of America.  (Applause.) 
And it’s a test we met later in the week when Congress passed higher education reforms that will have a tremendous impact on working families -- and America’s future.  That’s two major victories in one week that will improve the lives of our people for generations to come.  (Applause.)
Now, I’ve said before and I’ve repeated this week the health insurance reform bill I signed won’t fix every problem in our health care system in one fell swoop.  But it does represent some of the toughest insurance reforms in history.  It represents a major step forward towards giving Americans with insurance -– and those without -– a sense of security when it comes to their health care.  It enshrines the principle that when you get sick, you’ve got a society there, a community, that is going to help you get back on your feet.  It represents meaningful progress for the American people.
And today, I’m signing a bill that will make a number of improvements to these core reforms.  We’ll increase the size of tax credits to help middle-class families and small businesses pay for their health insurance.  (Applause.)
We’re going to offer $250 to seniors who fall in the Medicare coverage gap known as the doughnut hole to help them pay for prescriptions, and that’s a first step towards closing that gap completely.  (Applause.) 
We’ll make a significant new investment in community health centers all across America that can provide high-quality primary care to people who need it most.  (Applause.)  And we’ll strengthen efforts to combat waste and fraud and abuse, to make sure your dollars aren’t lining the pockets of insurance companies when they should be making your health care better.  (Applause.)
Now, the debate on health care reform is one that’s gone on for generations, and I’m glad -- I’m gratified that we were able to get it done last week.  But what’s gotten overlooked amid all the hoopla, all the drama of last week, is what happened in education -- when a great battle pitting the interests of the banks and financial institutions against the interests of students finally came to an end.  (Applause.) 
You see, for almost two decades, we’ve been trying to fix a sweetheart deal in federal law that essentially gave billions of dollars to banks to act as unnecessary middlemen in administering student loans.  So those are billions of dollars that could have been spent helping more of our students attend and complete college; that could have been spent advancing the dreams of our children; that could have been spent easing the burden of tuition on middle-class families.  Instead, that money was spent padding student lenders’ profits.
Now, it probably won’t surprise you to learn that the big banks and financial institutions hired a army of lobbyists to protect the status quo.  In fact, Sallie Mae, America’s biggest student lender, spent more than $3 million on lobbying last year alone.
But I didn’t stand with the banks and the financial industries in this fight.  That’s not why I came to Washington.  And neither did any of the members of Congress who are here today.  We stood with you.  We stood with America’s students.  (Applause.)  And together, we finally won that battle. 
I don’t have to tell folks here at NOVA why this victory matters.  In the 21st century, when the success of every American hinges more than ever on the quality of their education, and when America’s success as a nation rests more than ever on an educated workforce that is second to none, we can’t afford to waste billions of dollars on giveaways to banks.
We need to invest that money in our students.  We need to invest in our community colleges.  We need to invest in the future of this country.  We need to meet the goal I set last year and graduate more of our students than any other nation by the year 2020.  And through the extraordinary leadership of Education Secretary Arne Duncan, that’s what the reforms I’m signing today will help us do.  (Applause.) 
     By cutting out the middleman, we’ll save American taxpayers $68 billion in the coming years -- $68 billion.  That’s real money -- (laughter) -- real savings that we’ll reinvest to help improve the quality of higher education and make it more affordable.
Now, we’ve already taken a number of steps through the Recovery Act and through my budget to significantly increase the support provided to young people attending colleges and universities all across the country. 
And I just -- President Templin handed me a sheet just as I walked in.  Just in case you’re wondering whether this makes a difference, so far this year -- and the year isn’t over -- right here at NOVA, Pell Grant recipients increased by 41 percent over last year.  (Applause.)  The total dollar amount of Pell Grants increased by 59 percent.  The number of federally guaranteed loans increased by 43 percent and loan awards increased by 68 percent.  That’s right here at this one community college, because of the steps that we had already taken.  (Applause.)
So using the $68 billion that we’re saving, that had been going to the banks, here’s what we’re going to be able to do.  First, we will reinvest a portion of those savings to upgrade our community colleges, which are one of the great, undervalued assets in our education system.  (Applause.) 
Community colleges like NOVA are incredibly important because they serve a varied group of learners, from recent high school grads seeking a pathway to a college degree, to adults seeking training for the jobs of tomorrow.  By forging private sector partnerships, community colleges can offer students the education and training they need to find a good job when they graduate -- and it helps offer businesses the assurance they need that graduates will be ready for the jobs that they’re hired to do.
And because community colleges like NOVA are so essential to a competitive workforce, I’ve asked your outstanding professor, Dr. Jill Biden -- who does not have enough to do -- (laughter) -- to host a summit on community colleges at the White House this fall.  And we’re going to bring everybody together, from educators to students, experts to business leaders.  (Applause.) We are going to bring everybody together to share innovative ideas about how we can help students earn degrees and credentials, and to forge private sector partnerships so we can better prepare America’s workforce and America’s workers to succeed in the 21st century.
Now, to help open the doors of higher education to more students, we’ll also reinvest part of that $68 billion in savings in Pell Grants, one of the most popular forms of financial aid.  Pell Grants once covered more than three-quarters of the cost of going to college.  But now, because the cost of college has skyrocketed, the amount Pell Grants cover is about one-third.
 
Today, students hoping to attend college on a Pell Grant are going to be able to feel more secure, because not only are we going to offer over 800,000 additional Pell awards over the next 10 years, we’re also going to raise the amount they’re worth to almost $6,000, so that inflation doesn’t erode the value of your grant.  (Applause.) 
And we’ll put the entire Pell Grant program on firmer footing for years to come.  Altogether, we are more than doubling the amount of Pell Grant funding that was available when I took office –- it’s one of the most significant investments in higher education since the G.I. Bill.  (Applause.)
Now, third, we’re going to restore a measure of fairness to how students repay their loans.  Today, two out of every three students graduates with help from a loan, and often they take on a mountain of debt as a result.  Here in Virginia, the typical student carries almost $20,000 in debt.  Across the country, the average student graduates with over $23,000 in debt.  I know what that’s like.  Michelle and I had big debts coming out of school  -- debts we weren’t able to fully repay until just a few years before I started running for office.
Today, we’re making it easier for responsible students to pay off their loans.  Right now, if you’re a borrower, you don’t have to spend more than 15 percent of your income on loans.  But starting in 2014, you won’t have to pay more than 10 percent of your income in repaying your student loans.  (Applause.)  That will make a meaningful difference for over one million more students.  We’re also going to give students an incentive to do what’s right -- if you pay your loans on time, you’ll only have to pay them off for 20 years.  And you’ll only have to pay them off for 10 years if you repay them with service to your community, and to our country, as a teacher or a nurse or a member of our Armed Forces.  (Applause.) 
Finally, we’ll reinvest some of the $68 billion in savings to strengthen our Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority Serving Institutions.  (Applause.)  These are institutions that have struggled more than most in these tough economic times.
The reforms in this bill are significant, but they’re just part of a broader effort to strengthen our entire higher education system.  We’re putting college tuition tax credits in the pockets of millions of students from working families to help them pay for college.  We’ve taken steps to simplify the federal college assistance form -– called the FAFSA -– because it shouldn’t take a PhD to apply for financial aid.  (Applause.)  And we’re helping ensure that America’s high school graduates are ready for college.  All of this is paid for.  We’re redirecting money that was poorly spent to make sure we’re making investments in our future.
Now, this won’t solve all of our problems in higher education.  We continue to expect colleges and universities to do their part to hold down tuition increases.  (Applause.)  That has to happen.  We’ve got to work on that.  And we also need to take greater initiative not only to help more students enter college, we’ve got to make sure that we see more students successfully earn a college degree.  But what we’ve done over the past year represents enormous progress.
So I’ll close by saying this.  For a long time, our student loan system has worked for banks and financial institutions. Today, we’re finally making our student loan system work for students and our families.  But we’re also doing something more.
From the moment I was sworn into office, I’ve spoken about the urgent need for us to lay a new foundation for our economy and for our future.  And two pillars of that foundation are health care and education, and each has long suffered from problems that we chose to kick down the road.
With the bill I signed last week, we finally undertook meaningful reform of our health care system.  With this bill, and other steps we’ve pursued over the last year, we are finally undertaking meaningful reform in our higher education system.  So this week, we can rightly say the foundation on which America’s future will be built is stronger than it was one year ago.  (Applause.) 
And so at the end of this extraordinary week, I want to acknowledge some of the people who made it possible.  There isn’t time to single out everyone who’s here, the outstanding members of Congress, but I want to make sure I once again say this would not have happened had it not been for the leadership of Speaker Nancy Pelosi -- (applause) -- Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid  -- (applause) -- Senator Dick Durbin and Congressman Steny Hoyer. All provided outstanding leadership that our nation needed.  (Applause.) 
On health care, Max Baucus, Chris Dodd, Henry Waxman, Charlie Rangel, and so many others offered invaluable expertise throughout the year.  (Applause.)  Congressmen George Miller, Jim Clyburn, Dale Kildee, Ruben Hinojosa led the way in the House on education reforms that I sign today.  (Applause.) 
Senator Tom Harkin’s dedication ensured that the Senate would include these reforms in this bill.  (Applause.)  Virginia’s own Bobby Scott, and an outstanding freshman, Tom Perriello helped to make this thing possible.  (Applause.)  We are grateful to them.
Courage is an essential ingredient in any landmark legislation, particularly when the attacks are as fierce and unrelenting -- and inaccurate -- (laughter) -- as they have been over the past year.  I just want to commend members of Congress who had the courage to do what’s right -- (applause) -- and to say a special thank you to all of the newer members.  (Applause.) 
The past couple of years have brought one challenge after another, and you’ve risen to the moment each time.  I could not be prouder of the work that all of you have done.  And it would not have happened had it not been for the incredible persistence and stick-to-itiveness of all the folks in the audience here today. 
Ultimately, Congress responds to the voices that they’re hearing in their communities, and so many of you have written letters and come to meetings and let people know of the ordinary struggles that people are going through each and every day.  You’re what provided members of Congress the courage that they needed to do what was right.  And so on behalf of all of us who are serving in Washington, we want to thank you, the American people, for your outstanding leadership.  (Applause.)  
And with that, I’m going to sign this bill.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)
(The bill is signed.)  (Applause.) 
END
11:32 A.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 11, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden: The Enduring Partnership Between the United States and Israel
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you for that lovely introduction.  And thank you for hosting me at such a world-class center for higher learning.  It’s been a long time since I’ve been back on campus.  I was a mere child, a 31-year-old Senator when I was here the first time.  But it’s a privilege to be back. 
The past few days being back in Israel has been wonderful.  It’s -- it’s been an honor to be here, and it’s been -- I wanted everyone to know with whom I spoke, and all of you to know, the deep friendship and kinship I feel as well as President Obama feels for this magnificent country.  I should probably be used to it by now, but I’m always struck every time I come back by the hospitality of the Israeli people.  No matter how long I’ve been away -- and I imagine you’ve experienced this yourself -- the instant I return, I feel like I’m at home.  I feel like I never left.  I feel like things just picked up where they left off the day that I left being here.  So please accept my warmest gratitude, as well that of President Obama, who knows as well as I do that the United States has no better friend in the community of nations than Israel.  Thank you so much.  (Applause.) 
I see some of my U.S. friends down there in the front row.  I won’t identify them and ruin their reputations.  But they -- they know where my love for this country comes.  It started at my dinner table with my father, who you would refer to as a righteous Christian.  My father -- my dinner table was a place where we gathered to have conversation and incidentally eat, as opposed to the other way around.  And my father -- my father’s support for Israel is outrage for what had happened in the ‘30s and the failure of the world to act, his support for the creation of the state of Israel.  It generated a feeling for Israel that began in my gut and went to my heart, and the older I got matured in my mind. 
During those sessions, my other -- my father often spoke passionately about the special connection between the Jewish people and this land.  Like many of my countrymen, I experienced the magic of Israel at a relatively young age -- at least it looks young now from my perspective.  When I first visited here in 1973 on the eve of the Yom Kippur War, your nation was only a quarter-century old, and I was not much older.  Already, Israel had a tragic as well as triumphal history behind it, and as we all know, some very difficult days ahead.  Already, there was a sense here that anything was possible.
My very first meeting in Israel was maybe the one that I carry closest to my heart.  My first meeting in Israel -- I was invited by a woman named Golda Meir, who I admired from afar as millions of Americans did.  We sort of claimed her as our own.  I know she is Israeli, but we claimed her.  We claimed her as our own in America.  And I remember walking into her office as a young senator being literally in awe as she was so gracious the way she accepted me and gave me a hug more like my mother would, sat down behind her desk and while chain-smoking -- she had a series of maps behind her.  And there were six or seven maps.  She kept flipping the maps up and down, and explaining to me what exactly had happened in the Six-Day War.  And there was a young man sitting next to me, a guy named Yitzhak Rabin, who I met for the first time.  And as she pulled those maps up and down, educating this young senator as to the -- to the threat that this young nation of Israel was facing, I guess she could see the sense of apprehension on my face.  I found myself being -- the more she talked about 2 million Jews -- and back then, by the way, there were not that many Arabs compared to today.  The numbers were much smaller, but they were still exponentially larger than the Jewish population.  And she went through the threats that were faced, and how it had come through the battles of the Six-Day War.  She spoke so passionately about her country.
And I was concerned.  I guess it showed in my face.  I was concerned that surrounded by the neighbors who denied the very right of the nation to exist, how were you going to do this?  The Prime Minister caught me off guard.  After about an hour and a half, she looked at me and she said. “Senator, would you like a photo opportunity?”  And I thought, what the hell is a photo opportunity?  And I said, “Well, yes, Madam Prime Minister.”  We opened those double doors and we walked out into the ending room of her office and there was a lot of press there -- a lot, half a dozen photographers and cameras.  (Laughter.) 
For me, that was a lot, not like today.  And they started snapping pictures.  And while looking straight ahead, she talked to me without turning her head.  She said, “Senator, don’t look so worried.”  She said -- I said, “Well I am, Madam President, and because I just had this hour and a half.”  And she said -- she said, “We Israelis have a secret weapon.”  And I thought she only had said this to me, no one else in the whole world.  She said, “We have a secret weapon in our struggle with the Arabs.”  And I thought she was going to tell me about a new secret weapon.  (Laughter.)  And I found myself turning and looking at her, and the press -- because this was all just a stand-up photo opportunity.  And she said, “We have a secret weapon.  We have nowhere else to go.”
That trip was almost four decades ago, but I remember it as clearly as if it happened yesterday.  And it drove home all that my father had spoken of -- randomly, occasionally but consistently -- over the previous 15 years.  And he told me as a young boy, that Israel and Jews in the world had no place else to go with absolute certitude.  This place, it gets in your blood.  It never really lets you go.  
I expect that there are several people in the audience today who have had similar experiences who first came here as tourists or religious pilgrims and ended up making aliyah and launching a new life in northern kibbutz, or a small town in Negev, or in the beautiful city by the sea.  Throughout my career, Israel has not only remained close to my heart but it has been the center of my work as a United States Senator and now as Vice President of the United States.
I have had the privilege of returning many times, and to know every one of your prime ministers over these past three and a half decades, including your current leader who is a close, personal friend of over 33 years, Bibi Netanyahu. 
Israel’s history is a tale of remarkable accomplishment.  On a perilous patch of desert with sparse natural resources, you have built perhaps the most innovative economy in the world.  You have more start-ups per capita than any nation on the planet, more firms on the NASDAQ exchange than anyone except the United States, and more U.S. patents per capita than any country, including my own.  You have cultivated the gifts of 11 Nobel laureates, the great -- and as well as those of the great Itzhak Perlman, and in recent years you have Shai Agassi, whose path-breaking work on electric automobiles began not very far from where I stand.
Israel owes this remarkable and yet improbable success, I believe, to your democratic traditions, to its patriotic and pioneering citizens, and as with my own country, to its willingness to welcome the persecuted and the downtrodden from far-flung corners of the globe.  All this gives life to Theodor Herzl’s famous slogan, which I was reminded of this week while visiting his grave on this 150th anniversary of his birth.  He said, “If you will it, it is no dream.”
I had said in a speech in the United States some years ago for which I got some criticism, I said were I a Jew, I would be a Zionist.  And it got a lot of national publicity, how could I say that, until I was reminded by my father you need not be a Jew to be a Zionist. 
Ladies and gentlemen, just over 60 years ago, Israel’s founders gave life to Herzl’s dream by willing Israel into being.  Since then, this nation has become more than an undeniable fact, more than just a legacy of age-old ties between a people and a land, though it is both of those things.  Your very existence is also a hard-won and inviolable right.
Israel’s unique relationship with the United States means that you need not bear that heavy burden alone.  Our nations’ unbreakable bond borne of common values, interwoven cultures, and mutual interests has spanned the entirety of Israel’s history.  And it’s -- it’s impervious to any shifts in either country and either country’s partisan politics.  No matter what challenges we face, this bond will endure.  As a result, generations of Israelis and Americans and American-Israelis have kept a foot in each country, enriching both our nations and peoples.  I met with some of your leading high-tech leaders earlier, prior to coming to the stage.  And they have a foot in both countries, many of them. 
While these close relationships span the realm of commerce and education, medicine and technology, culture and the arts, at its core is an ironclad commitment to security -- Israel and my own country’s.  Every day, Israel faces bravely threats no country should have to endure.  No parent should their child to schools equipped with air raid sirens in the year 2010.  No government should be expected to turn a blind eye while an enemy calls for its destruction.
I am here to remind you, though I hope you will never forget, that America stands with you shoulder-to-shoulder in facing these threats.  President Obama and I represent an unbroken chain of American leaders who have understood this critical, strategic relationship.  As the President said recently, “I will never waver from ensuring Israel’s security and helping them secure themselves in what is a very hostile region.”
President Obama has not only stated those words, he has translated that vow into action in his first year in ways both known to the public and not known to you, as Prime Minister Netanyahu eloquently acknowledged the other day when he and I were meeting and had a short press conference that followed.  Beyond providing Israel nearly $3 billion in military aid each and every year, we have reinvigorated defense consultations and redoubled our efforts to ensure that Israel’s -- that Israel’s forces will always maintain a qualitative edge.
We lead the fight in international institutions against the insidious campaign to challenge Israel’s legitimacy and question its right to self-defense.  Since our administration came into office, our militaries have expanded cooperation -- not maintained, expanded -- cooperation on joint exercises and missile defense.  Last fall, more than 1,000 American troops participated in Juniper Cobra ballistic missile defense exercises, the largest such drill to date. 
And it should go without saying, but I’ll say it anyway so there’s no doubt, the United States stands resolutely beside Israel against the scourge of terrorism, from which both of our countries have suffered badly.  No one in this audience needs to be reminded of the fear and devastation caused by suicide bombers or by rockets from Southern Lebanon or from Gaza.  The band of Israeli territory outside the rocket’s range grows narrower all the time.  And I, as an American, continue to marvel -- continue to marvel at the residents in the region being able to resolutely get up every morning of the communities -- other communities that in fact are within the bulls eye, the crosshairs, how you respond to that with defiance and not fear.  American support for Israel is not just an act of friendship; it’s an act of fundamental national self-interest on the part of the United States, a key component to our broader efforts to secure this region and a wider world, as well as our own security.
Ladies and gentlemen, I’ve heard it raised occasionally in editorials in this country and others wondering about our resolve.  Make no mistake about America’s resolve.  Make no mistake about America’s resolve.  We have 200,000 young women and men -- we are spending a quarter of a trillions a year.  We have had tens of thousands of fallen angels and multiple times more injured in the service of our nation deployed far from home  in Iraq and Afghanistan.  There, and elsewhere, we are aggressively confronting violent extremism and radical ideologies that threaten not only you and the United States, but our allies as well. 
But our approach consists of more than the awesome military might we possess and are willing to use.  From the very start, President Obama has called for a new era of diplomatic engagement with both our friends -- some of whom we had alienated the previous years -- as well as -- as well as those who are not viewed as our friends. 
In Cairo last June, he launched a new beginning between the United States and the Muslim communities around the world.  Later this month, the President will continue this engagement by visiting Indonesia, home of the world’s largest Muslim population where he lived as a boy.  We are absolutely convinced that this approach will improve not only our security, but as a consequence, your security.
A new generation of Muslims is coming to age, more numerous than its predecessors, more dispersed geographically, and because of technology, more closely connected with each other and with the forces and events that shape the world we share.  If we can rollback recent tensions and redirect crude stereotypes -- theirs and our own -- it will make America safer and our closest allies, like Israel, safer as well in our view.
We are returning an ambassador to Damascus and elevating our diplomatic contacts.  We do so with our eyes wide open both to our deep concerns with Syrian actions that has threatened your security and the stability of the region, and also to the hope of a better relationship and peace between Israel and Syria.  And we will continue to help strengthen the institutions in Lebanon and work to implement the U.N. Security Council resolutions aimed at ending the flow of weapons to Hizballah and disarming this threat to Israel, as well as to the civilian Lebanese. 
With other Arab and Muslim countries, we are revitalizing a partnership in education, science, technology, business, culture; because the best way to counter the lure of extreme ideology is to offer future opportunity.  In speaking with your Prime Minister recently, he talked about the high birth rates in neighboring poor countries, including Yemen, and the need for us to provide economic outlets and opportunities so there is an option.
Looming over all our efforts in this region is the shadow cast by Iran, home of a -- home of a great civilization and proud people who suffer from a leadership that flouts the will of the world by pursuing nuclear weapons and supporting terrorism and terrorists.  Over the past decade, Iran has become more, not less dangerous, building thousands of centrifuges that churn out nuclear material, funding and arming dangerous proxies like Hizballah and Hamas, intimidating both its neighbors as well as its own citizens.
From the moment we were elected, President Obama decided that we needed a new approach.  He has sought to engage Iran’s leaders for the purpose of changing their conduct, knowing full well how difficult that may be, but also knowing that if they fail to respond, we would be in a much stronger position to rally the international community to impose consequences for their actions.  
Iran thus far has refused to cooperate, as the whole world has witnessed.  Instead it has engaged in more violations of international obligations, like undeclared enrichment facilities that were recently exposed by the United States, and the decision to enrich uranium to 20 percent to build more -- and to build more enrichment facilities, all violations.  It rejected a good-faith offer to exchange its low enriched uranium for fuel that could power a research reactor to produce medical isotopes.  And it continues to deploy thugs to lock up and beat down those who bravely take to the streets in a quest for basic justice in their own country.
The Iranian leadership’s continuing defiance has set the stage for our efforts to mobilize the world to impose meaningful sanctions that clarify for the Iranian leadership the stark choice:  follow international rules or face harsh penalties and further isolation. 
You have to acknowledge that today Iran is more isolated with its own people as well as the region and in the world than it has been at any time in the past two decades.  The United States is determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, period.  I know -- I know that for Israel -- (applause) -- I know that for Israel, there is no greater existential strategic threat.  Trust me, we get that.  It’s also a threat -- the acquisition of nuclear weapons by Iran is also a threat to the security -- short-term, mid-term, and long-term -- to the United States of America. 
And many other countries in this region and around the world strongly oppose a nuclear-armed Iran.  It would threaten them, trigger an arms race in this region, and undermine the efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, which would be a sorry outcome for such a promising beginning of the 21st century.  For all those reasons, confronting this challenge is and must be a top national priority for the United States of America.
We are determined to keep the pressure on Iran so that it will change its course.  And as we do, we will also be seeking to improve relations between the Israelis and Palestinians.  They are connected indirectly, but there is a relationship.  We call on Arab states who share a mutual concern about Iran -- we call on Arab states to support the effort to bring peace between Palestinians and the Israelis, and to take their own steps forward for peace with Israel.
These are critical goals in their own rights.  Their pursuit also denies Tehran the opportunity to exploit the differences between Israelis and Palestinians, and Israelis and the Arab world, and to distract the many countries that stand united against Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons and the support of terrorism.  Building peace and security between a Jewish democratic state of Israel and a viable, independent Palestinian state is profoundly in Israel’s interest, if you will forgive me for suggesting that.  (Applause.)
I’ve learned never tell another man or another country what’s in their own interest, but it seems so -- it’s also profoundly in the interest of Palestinians.  And it’s fundamentally in the national security interest of the United States of America.
Ladies and gentlemen, in my experience one necessary precondition for progress is that the rest of the world knows this.  There is no space -- this is what they must know, every time progress is made, it’s made when the rest of the world knows there is absolutely no space between the United States and Israel when it comes to security, none.  No space.  (Applause.)  That’s the only time when progress has been made.   
And I applaud Prime Minister Netanyahu’s recent call for two states for two people, lending a vital voice to what the Israelis, Palestinians, their Arab neighbors all know in their heart to be true.  Ladies and gentlemen, the status quo is not sustainable. 
It’s no secret the demographic realities make it increasingly difficult for Israel to remain both a Jewish homeland and a democratic country in the absence of the Palestinian state.  Genuine steps toward a two-state solution are also required to empower those living to live in peace and security with Israel and to undercut their rivals who will never accept that future. 
For Israel, then, this is about both preserving your identity and achieving the security you deserve, lasting security.  
For Palestinians, statehood will not just fulfill a legitimate and long-sought aspiration common to all peoples; it will restore the fundamental dignity and self-respect that their current predicament denies them.  I understand why both sides are skeptical.  I’ve been doing this for a long time, not as long as my friend, Dennis Ross who is with me -- Ross, who is with me -- Ross who is with me.  He is with me.  (Laughter and applause.)  He has even more experience in the nitty-gritty of this than I do.  We understand why both sides are skeptical.  We’ve been down this road before and so have you, which every time makes it a little harder to go down the road again.
But I know -- I know that Israel’s faith in the prospects for peace have been shaken by the searing experience of withdrawing from Lebanon and from Gaza, only to be rewarded with rocket fire and ambushes across your border.  I know you’ve been frustrated by the unwillingness of some Palestinian leaders to curb incitement and take the risk that peace requires, just as when the West Bank checkpoints proliferate and settlements grow, the Palestinians experience their own crisis in confidence and come to doubt Israeli intentions.
And we all know what happens when cynicism festers -- distrust, harsh words, and eventually violence.  The cycle of unintended consequences, which has happened more times than I can count, has led you to build more walls that may offer short term relief, but will not bring the sustained security that you seek.  This is no way to live.  This cycle must be broken.
In the Middle East -- in the Middle East that I first visited, peace between Israelis and its neighbors seemed absolutely impossible even to discuss.  Those who suggested a two-state solution -- and no one did that, actually.  But had someone suggested a two-state solution, they would have been considered either demented or dreamers.  But then, Israel, Egypt and Jordan all acted boldly to end decades of conflict.  Over time, other contacts have emerged between Israelis and Arabs.
And there is now an Arab Peace Initiative that makes an important contribution by envisioning a future in which Israel is secure and at peace with its Arab neighbors.  Turning these visions into reality is among the hardest challenges we face, but we have to face it.  There is no alternative.  (Applause.) 
As Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “all sides” -- “all sides need to take action in good faith if peace is to have a chance.”  But it’s hard, my words, it’s hard.  While it’s always easier to point fingers, it’s time for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to acknowledge each others’ steps to heed this call, even when more remains to be done -- and for the world to do the same thing.
Your Prime Minister is roundly criticized in other parts of the world, but your Prime Minister has endorsed the idea of a Palestinian State.  He has removed roadblocks and checkpoints that choked the West Bank.  These were difficult decisions -- not all that was asked for on the other side, but these were difficult decisions.
It was also difficult for the Palestinian Authority to take a step that it has to take to combat incitement and reform the institutions it’s reforming.  Of an even greater note, it’s building an effective -- for the first time a genuinely effective security force to uphold law and order, in my view, with the potential to do it throughout the West Bank and throughout the Palestinian territories. 
President Obama and I believe that -- believe that in President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad, men who I’ve known for a long time, Israeli leaders finally have willing partners who share the goal of peace between two states and have the competence to establish a nation.  Their commitment to peace is an opportunity that must be seized.  It must be seized.  Who has there been better to date, to have the prospect of settling this with?  But instead, two days ago the Israeli government announced it would advance planning for new housing units in East Jerusalem.  I realize this is a very touchy subject in Israel as well as in my own country.  But because that decision, in my view, undermined the trust required for productive negotiations, I -- and at the request of President Obama condemned it immediately and unequivocally.  (Applause.)
Now, some legitimately may have been surprised that such a strong supporter of Israel for the last 37 years and beyond, but 37 years as an elected official, how I can speak out so strongly given the ties that I share as well as my country shares with Israel.  But quite frankly, folks, sometimes only a friend can deliver the hardest truth.  And I appreciate, by the way, the response your Prime Minister today announced this morning that he is putting in place a process to prevent the recurrence of that sort of that sort of events and who clarified that the beginning of actual construction on this particular project would likely take several years -- a statement he put out.  That’s significant, because it gives negotiations the time to resolve this, as well as other outstanding issues.  Because when it was announced, I was on the West Bank.  Everyone there thought it had meant immediately the resumption of the construction of 1,600 new units.   
Look, folks, as we move forward I promise you this:  The United States will continue to hold both sides accountable for any statements or any actions that inflame tensions or prejudice the outcome of these talks.  The most important thing is for these talks to go forward and go promptly and go forward in good faith.  We can’t delay, because when progress is postponed, extremists exploit our differences and they sow hate. 
These indirect talks everyone knows are just that, indirect talks, indirect negotiations.  The only path, though, to finally resolving the permanent status issues, including borders, security, refugees, and Jerusalem are direct talks.  Our administration -- (applause) -- but you’ve got to begin.  The process has to begin.  Our administration fully supports this effort led by our Special Envoy, Senator George Mitchell, a seasoned negotiator and a proven peacemaker in whom the President, the Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and I have complete and utter confidence.
We believe that through good-faith negotiations, the parties can mutually agree to an outcome which ends the conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and viable state based on the ‘67 lines with agreed swaps and Israel’s goal of a Jewish state with secure and recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments and meet Israel’s security requirements.
Many challenges remain.  Gilad Shalit is still in captivity and we pray every day for the day when he will come home and be reunited with his family.  (Applause.)  Ladies and gentlemen, incitement against Israel continues as do attacks on the legitimacy of Jewish ties to this ancient land. 
And the ongoing threat from Gaza still in Hamas’s grip, and from Hizballah in Southern Lebanon, remind us that your security is far from assured.  Meanwhile, though, our policy and our concerns about Israel’s settlements remain unchanged.  And while Hamas has condemned Gaza’s populace to misery and hopelessness, Israel too has a responsibility to address their many needs.  That’s why we’re working with the Israeli government to do just that and address some of legitimate needs without -- without further endangering Israel’s security.
Ladies and gentlemen, I’m a Roman Catholic.  And no one -- and I’m no expert on the Old Testament.  But I know we’re gathered today between Purim and Passover, holidays that teach us about salvation and redemption.  It was written in the Book of Isaiah that Israel shall be “a light unto the nations.”  And yet, for more than six decades, Israelis have often sought but never found the salvation of a lasting peace. And it is very hard -- it is very hard to be a beacon for others, when you are constantly at war.  To end this historic conflict, both sides must be historically bold, because if each waits stubbornly for the other to act first, this will go on and we’ll be waiting for an eternity. 
Back home, I am sometimes called an optimist, but I am an optimist about the prospects for peace because I am a realist.  And to paraphrase Golda Meir, there is nowhere else to go.  There is nowhere else to go.  I cannot tell you that peace will come easily, you know better.  In human history, it rarely has.  But I can promise you, both Israelis and Palestinians, that the rewards for success will be boundless and that so long as well-intentioned people are engaged in this struggle, the United States will be your partner.
Thank you.  And may God protect you, and may God protect Israel.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.) 
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 10, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
Muq’ata
Ramallah
PRESIDENT ABBAS:  In the name of God the merciful, the compassionate, it is our pleasure to welcome the Vice President, our friend, Joseph Biden, here in Ramallah.  This visit comes as an expression of the interest that President Obama’s administration has according to the peace process and to achieve the two-state solution.
The establishment of the Palestinian state and the 1967 borders -- the decisions that the Israeli government has announced over the past two days and the establishment and the construction of thousands of new units in the Palestinian territories constitute an undermining of the confidence and all the efforts that were exerted over the past months to launch the indirect negotiations.  The decision to approve these negotiations was taken with great difficulties within the Arab Committee and the leadership entities of the Palestinian people.  And in order to reiterate our intention to support the American efforts to launch the peace process, to revive the peace process, the Israeli resettlement policies and particularly, in Jerusalem, threaten these negotiations and we ask that these decisions are revoked.
I reiterate, Mr. Vice President, our commitment to peace as a strategic option, just and comprehensive, a permanent peace on all tracks, including the Syrian and the Lebanese tracks that would lead to ending the Israeli occupation that started in 1967, based on the roadmap plan, including the Arab Peace Initiative.  I would like to address the Israelis’ settling.  The time has come to make peace, peace under a two-state solution -- based on the two-state solution, the state of Israel that lives in peace and security alongside the state of Palestine on the borders of the 4th of June 1967 with its capitol East Jerusalem.  And here it is important to speak about the siege that is imposed on Gaza strip that should be lifted in order to provide for the basic needs of our people in Gaza strip in addition to the construction materials that are necessary, because there are 25,000 houses that are in debris and there are hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who live without shelter and need houses.  And, therefore, we ask that the Gaza strip is provided with construction materials.
Again, I would like to call out to the Israeli government not to waste this opportunity to make peace.  I call upon this government to stop its settlement policies and to stop imposing fights on the ground and to give the efforts of President Obama’s administration and Representative Mitchell’s efforts the opportunity to succeed.  Thank you, Mr. Vice President.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you very much for your hospitality and for the opportunity to be with you again.  I greatly appreciate the time you’ve given me, you and the Palestinian Authority.  I also had the pleasure of meeting earlier this morning with your Prime Minister Fayyad in -- here in Ramallah.  I must say I admire the courage and conviction of the two of you, whom President Obama and I consider willing partners in the quest for a lasting peace in the region.
Our administration is fully committed to the Palestinian people and to achieving a Palestinian state that is independent, viable, and contiguous.  Everyone should know -- everyone should know by now that there is no viable alternative to a two-state solution, which must be an integral part of any comprehensive peace plan.  The United States considers the goal to be not only in the interest of the Palestinians and the Israelis, but in the United States’ interest as well.  We also believe that the divide between the Israelis and Palestinians can only be resolved by negotiations.  The indirect talks being launched should lead to direct negotiations, which will necessarily reach -- which would be necessary to reach an agreement on the permanent status -- status issues which you referenced, Mr. President, such as borders, security, refugees, and Jerusalem.  And the United States pledges to play an active as well as a sustained role in these talks.  It’s incumbent on both parties to build an atmosphere of support for negotiations and not to complicate them.
Yesterday -- yesterday, the decision by the Israeli government to advance planning for new housing units in east Jerusalem undermined that very trust, the trust that we need right now in order to begin as well as produce -- have profitable negotiations.  That is why I immediately condemned the action.
As we move forward, the United States will hold both sides accountable for any statements or actions that inflame tensions or prejudice the outcome of talks, as this decision did.  The United States strongly supports the Palestinian Authority’s efforts to build as well as strengthen its institutions and develop the economy of a state, including Prime Minister Fayyad’s two-year institution building plan.
We must find a way to improve the lives of Gazans, as well.  The Palestinian Authority offers the possibility of a peaceful, independent, and more prosperous future rather than the false promises of extremists.  A historic peace is going to require both the Palestinians as well as the Israelis, as well as their leaders, to be historically bold.
And I promise you, Mr. President, the United States will always stand with those who take the risk that peace requires.  Again, Mr. President, I thank you very much for the courage you’ve shown in moving forward.  I thank you for the hospitality you’ve extended to me and my delegation.  And I look forward to seeing you many more times.
Thank you.
PRESIDENT ABBAS:  Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 09, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden at Yad Vashem Memorial
Jerusalem
Tuesday, March 9, 2010
 VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  I want to thank our hosts for showing us through Yad Vashem.  As a young father, when I introduced each of our sons -- who are grown men now -- to Europe at age 15, I took them first to Dachau for them to understand as young men the human capacity -- ability of mankind to be so brutal.  But also, I took my son here to Israel to let him know that the indomitable spirit of the human being is not able to be snuffed out.
What I wrote in the book is as a fan of the Irish poet William Butler Yeats.  Writing about his Ireland, he said, “Too long a suffering makes a stone of the heart.”  What I wrote here is that every day, Israel makes a lie of the poet’s words -- ”too long a suffering makes a stone of the heart” -- because for world Jewry, Israel is the heart.  For world Jewry, Israel is the light.  For world Jewry, Israel is the hope.  If anyone ever wondered about that, they ought to take the tour of the museum.  They would not doubt it again.  The word -- phrase “never again” is used so often it almost has lost its meaning.  But, again, all you have to do is walk through -- walk through Yad Vashem and understand how incredible -- how incredible the journey has been and the spirit a world Jewry and that Israel is such a central part to its existence.
Thank you.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  March 09, 2010
Remarks by Vice President Biden and Prime Minister Netanyahu in a Joint Statement to the Press
12:36 P.M. (local)
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU:  Vice President Biden, Joe, welcome to Israel and welcome to Jerusalem.  We’ve been personal friends for almost three decades.  Can you believe it has been that long? 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  No.  You’re getting older, Bibi, I don’t know how.
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU:  But you remain younger all the time.  (Laughter.)  And in all that time, you’ve been a real friend to me, and a real friend to Israel and to the Jewish people.  And you’ve come to Israel many times since you came here first on the eve of the Yom Kippur.  But now, you’re coming as the Vice President of the United States of America.  And this is deeply appreciated and, for me, deeply moving. 
President Obama has said in Cairo, and he has repeated this many times since, that the bonds between Israel and the United States are unbreakable.  And he has shown that in the last year in things that are known to the public and some things that are not known to the public.  In pursuing, for example, the joint military exercises for military defense between the Israeli army and the American military; in securing Israel’s qualitative military edge; and in many other activities along the world’s scene, including the battle against the infamous Goldstone report.  I think that the bonds -- exactly as President Obama has said, the bonds are unbreakable.  And your visit demonstrates how strong they are.
I think this unbreakable bond will help our two countries meet the two historic challenges that we face today in the Middle East.  The first and foremost among them is the need to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons, and the second is the need to advance a secure peace between Israel and our Palestinian and other Arab neighbors.
I very much appreciate the efforts of President Obama and the American government to lead the international community to place tough sanctions on Iran.  The stronger those sanctions are, the more likely it will be that the Iranian regime will have to choose between advancing its nuclear program and advancing the future of its own permanence.  I think that the international community and the leading countries in the international community have to join the American effort.  And Israel has been helping out with key countries and continues to do so.
I also appreciate the administration’s effort to advance peace in the region.  I know that this has been difficult and has required a great deal of patience.  But I’m pleased that these efforts are beginning to bear fruit.  And we have to be persistent and purposeful in making sure that we get to those direct negotiations that will enable us to resolve this conflict. 
I look forward to working with President Obama, and with you and your entire administration, to forge a historic peace agreement in which the permanence and legitimacy of the Jewish state of Israel is recognized by our Palestinian neighbors, and in which Israel’s security is guaranteed for generations to come. 
Again, Vice President -- my friend, Joe, it’s a pleasure to welcome you to Jerusalem.  Welcome.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Prime Minister, it’s a pleasure to be back.  It’s been too long between visits here.  And it is true that you and I have been friends a long, long time.  And as a matter of fact, when each of us were in the minority, we’d -- occasionally, I’d find -- get a phone call at home and I’d call you as well to get a sense of what’s going on.  Our friendship is real, but it is -- what’s even deeper is the relationship between the United States and Israel. 
But Prime Minister, I’m sure you’d agree we’ve had a -- we had a very productive discussion spanning a wide range of issues that affect both our nations.  The relationship between Israel and the United States has been, and will continue to be, a centerpiece -- a centerpiece of American policy.  And it’s been that way since Israel’s founding in 1948.  And, quite frankly, it was a major focus of my work for all those years as a United States Senator and chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.
Our two countries are bound by historic and cultural ties, and so many shared interests, that it would take too long to enumerate, and also by a wide range of deep-seated personal relationships and friendships that span the time even before 1948.  Our ties have been strengthened by our deep cooperation in many fields including science and economic development, and a range of other policy areas as well. 
But the cornerstone of the relationship -- the cornerstone of the relationship is our absolute, total, unvarnished commitment to Israel’s security.  Bibi, you heard me say before, progress occurs in the Middle East when everyone knows there is simply no space between the United States and Israel.  There is no space between the United States and Israel when it comes to Israel’s security.  And for that reason, and many others, addressing Iran’s nuclear program has been of -- one of our administration’s priorities.
We’re determined -- we’re determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.  And we’re working with many countries around the world to convince Tehran to meet its international obligations and cease and desist.  Iran must also curb its other destabilizing actions in the region, well beyond their desire to acquire nuclear weapons.  And that is their continued support for terrorist groups that threaten Israel, and I might add, our interests as well.
President Obama and I strongly believe that the best long-term guarantee for Israel’s security is a comprehensive Middle East peace with the Palestinians, with the Syrians, with Lebanon and leading eventually to full and normalized relationships with the entire Arab world.  It’s overwhelmingly in the interest of Israel, but it’s also overwhelmingly of interest to the Arab world.  And it’s in our interest, as well.
And so, Mr. Prime Minister, toward that end I am very pleased that -- that you and the Palestinian leadership have agreed to launch indirect talks.  We hope that these talks will lead, and they must lead, eventually to negotiations and direct discussions between the parties.  The goal is, obviously, to resolve the final status issues and to achieve a two-state solution with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security.  And historic peace is going to require both parties to make some historically bold commitments.  You have done it before, and I’m confident for real peace you would do it again.
Over the last year, Mr. Prime Minister, you have taken significant steps including the moratorium that has limited new settlement construction activity.  And you have significantly increased freedom of movement across the West Bank.  Palestinian leaders are beginning to make progress on their determined willingness to -- especially in their efforts to reform their institutions of government and with their security force -- their security forces becoming much more reliable. 
It’s easy to point fingers, particularly in this part of the world, at what each side has not done.  But it’s also important to give credit where things have been done in order to be able to move forward.  Mr. Prime Minister, the United States will always stand with those who take risks for peace.  And you’re prepared to do that.  And I am hopeful.  And I’ll be having discussions with Palestinian leaders.  It is my hope and expectation that they will be prepared, as well. 
The proximity start -- talks are just that, a start.  They’re not designed to finish the process.  And so, Mr. Prime Minister, I thank you for all the time you have given me.  And it’s just, quite frankly, good to be back in your company and see you again. 
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU:  Thank you.  Thank you, Joe.  I have one thing to offer you right now, and it’s broken glass.  (Laughter.)  So what I’m going to do is I’m going to sign -- but I need a pen.  Thank you. 
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Don’t cut yourself.
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU:  Now, this is a significant piece of paper.  I will say that agreements are dependent on the arrangements not on paper but on the ground.  Here is a piece of paper that reflects an arrangement on the ground.  We have planted a circle of trees in Jerusalem in memory of your mother, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden, because you have said many times that she was a source of immeasurable strength, which I recognize in you, Joe.  So we planted a tree to serve as a tribute -- a circle of trees next to the leaders of the nations.  We have a forest of the leaders of the nations, and right next to it are the trees that we have planted in memory of your mother as a tribute to her immeasurable strength.  And I want to offer it to you on your visit to Israel.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, thank you very much.  If you don’t mind my saying, Mr. Prime Minister, my love for your country was watered by this Irish lady, who was proudest of me when I was working with and for the security of Israel.  So that’s a great honor.  Thank you very much.
END
12:50 P.M. (local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  February 18, 2010
Remarks of Vice President Biden at National Defense University - As Prepared for Delivery
The Path to Nuclear Security: Implementing the President’s Prague Agenda
Ladies and gentlemen; Secretaries Gates and Chu; General Cartwright; Undersecretary Tauscher; Administrator D’Agostino; members of our armed services; students and faculty; thank you all for coming.
At its founding, Elihu Root gave this campus a mission that is the very essence of our national defense: “Not to promote war, but to preserve peace by intelligent and adequate preparation to repel aggression.” For more than a century, you and your predecessors have heeded that call. There are few greater contributions citizens can claim.
Many statesmen have walked these grounds, including our Administration’s outstanding National Security Advisor, General Jim Jones. You taught him well. George Kennan, the scholar and diplomat, lectured at the National War College in the late 1940s. Just back from Moscow, in a small office not far from here, he developed the doctrine of Containment that guided a generation of Cold War foreign policy.
Some of the issues that arose during that time seem like distant memories. But the topic I came to discuss with you today, the challenge posed by nuclear weapons, continues to demand our urgent attention.
Last April, in Prague, President Obama laid out his vision for protecting our country from nuclear threats. 
He made clear we will take concrete steps toward a world without nuclear weapons, while retaining a safe, secure, and effective arsenal as long as we still need it.  We will work to strengthen the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.  And we will do everything in our power to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to terrorists and also to states that don’t already possess them.
It’s easy to recognize the threat posed by nuclear terrorism.  But we must not underestimate how proliferation to a state could destabilize regions critical to our security and prompt neighbors to seek nuclear weapons of their own. 
Our agenda is based on a clear-eyed assessment of our national interest.  We have long relied on nuclear weapons to deter potential adversaries. 
Now, as our technology improves, we are developing non-nuclear ways to accomplish that same objective. The Quadrennial Defense Review and Ballistic Missile Defense Review, which Secretary Gates released two weeks ago, present a plan to further strengthen our preeminent conventional forces to defend our nation and our allies.
Capabilities like an adaptive missile defense shield, conventional warheads with worldwide reach, and others that we are developing enable us to reduce the role of nuclear weapons, as other nuclear powers join us in drawing down. With these modern capabilities, even with deep nuclear reductions, we will remain undeniably strong.
As we’ve said many times, the spread of nuclear weapons is the greatest threat facing our country.
That is why we are working both to stop their proliferation and eventually to eliminate them. Until that day comes, though, we will do everything necessary to maintain our arsenal.
At the vanguard of this effort, alongside our military, are our nuclear weapons laboratories, national treasures that deserve our support. Their invaluable contributions range from building the world’s fastest supercomputers, to developing cleaner fuels, to surveying the heavens with robotic telescopes.
But the labs are best known for the work they do to secure our country. Time and again, we have asked our labs to meet our most urgent strategic needs. And time and again, they have delivered.
In 1939, as fascism began its march across Europe, Asia, and Africa, Albert Einstein warned President Roosevelt that the Nazis were racing to build a weapon, the likes of which the world had never seen. In the Southwest Desert, under the leadership of Robert Oppenheimer, the physicists of Los Alamos won that race and changed the course of history.
Sandia was born near Albuquerque soon after the Second World War and became our premier facility for developing the non-nuclear components of our nuclear weapons program.
And a few years later the institution that became Lawrence Livermore took root in California. During the arms race that followed the Korean War, it designed and developed warheads that kept our nuclear capabilities second to none.
These examples illustrate what everyone in this room already knows - that the past century’s defining conflicts were decided not just on the battlefield, but in the classroom and in the laboratory.
Air Force General Hap Arnold, an aviation pioneer whose vision helped shape the National War College, once argued that the First World War was decided by brawn and the Second by logistics. “The Third World War will be different,” he predicted. “It will be won by brains.”
General Arnold got it almost right.  Great minds like Kennan and Oppenheimer helped win the Cold War and prevent World War Three altogether.
During the Cold War, we tested nuclear weapons in our atmosphere, underwater and underground, to confirm that they worked before deploying them, and to evaluate more advanced concepts. But explosive testing damaged our health, disrupted our environment and set back our non-proliferation goals.
Eighteen years ago, President George H.W. Bush signed the nuclear testing moratorium enacted by Congress, which remains in place to this day. 
Under the moratorium, our laboratories have maintained our arsenal through the Stockpile Stewardship Program without underground nuclear testing, using techniques that are as successful as they are cutting edge.
Today, the directors of our nuclear laboratories tell us they have a deeper understanding of our arsenal from Stockpile Stewardship than they ever had when testing was commonplace. 
Let me repeat that - our labs know more about our arsenal today than when we used to explode our weapons on a regular basis.  With our support, the labs can anticipate potential problems and reduce their impact on our arsenal.
Unfortunately, during the last decade, our nuclear complex and experts were neglected and underfunded.
Tight budgets forced more than 2,000 employees of Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore from their jobs between 2006 and 2008, including highly-skilled scientists and engineers.
And some of the facilities we use to handle uranium and plutonium date back to the days when the world’s great powers were led by Truman, Churchill, and Stalin. The signs of age and decay are becoming more apparent every day.
Because we recognized these dangers, in December, Secretary Chu and I met at the White House with the heads of the three nuclear weapons labs. They described the dangerous impact these budgetary pressures were having on their ability to manage our arsenal without testing.  They say this situation is a threat to our security. President Obama and I agree.
That’s why earlier this month we announced a new budget that reverses the last decade’s dangerous decline.
It devotes $7 billion to maintaining our nuclear stockpile and modernizing our nuclear infrastructure.  To put that in perspective, that’s $624 million more than Congress approved last year—and an increase of $5 billion over the next five years.  Even in these tight fiscal times, we will commit the resources our security requires.
This investment is not only consistent with our nonproliferation agenda; it is essential to it.   Guaranteeing our stockpile, coupled with broader research and development efforts, allows us to pursue deep nuclear reductions without compromising our security.  As our conventional capabilities improve, we will continue to reduce our reliance on nuclear weapons.
Responsible disarmament requires versatile specialists to manage it.
The skilled technicians who look after our arsenal today are the ones who will safely dismantle it tomorrow.
And chemists who understand how plutonium ages also develop forensics to track missing nuclear material and catch those trafficking in it. 
Our goal of a world without nuclear weapons has been endorsed by leading voices in both parties. These include two former Secretaries of State from Republican administrations, Henry Kissinger and George Shultz; President Clinton’s Secretary of Defense Bill Perry; and my former colleague Sam Nunn, for years the Democratic Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. 
Together, these four statesmen called eliminating nuclear weapons “a bold initiative consistent with America’s moral heritage.”
During the 2008 Presidential campaign, both the President and Senator McCain supported the same objective. We will continue to build support for this emerging bipartisan consensus like the one around containment of Soviet expansionism that George Kennan inspired.
Toward that end, we have worked tirelessly to implement the President’s Prague agenda.
In September, the President chaired an historic meeting of the UN Security Council, which unanimously embraced the key elements of the President’s vision.
As I speak, U.S. and Russian negotiators are completing an agreement that will reduce strategic weapons to their lowest levels in decades. 
Its verification measures will provide confidence its terms are being met.  These reductions will be conducted transparently and predictably. The new START treaty will promote strategic stability and bolster global efforts to prevent proliferation by showing that the world’s leading nuclear powers are committed to reducing their arsenals. 
And it will build momentum for collaboration with Russia on strengthening the global consensus that nations who violate their NPT obligations should be held to account. 
This strategy is yielding results.  We have tightened sanctions on North Korea’s proliferation activities through the most restrictive UN Security Council resolution to date - and the international community is enforcing these sanctions effectively.
And we are now working with our international partners to ensure that Iran, too, faces real consequences for failing to meet its obligations.
In the meantime, we are completing a government-wide review of our nuclear posture.
Already, our budget proposal reflects some of our key priorities, including increased funding for our nuclear complex, and a commitment to sustain our heavy bombers and land and submarine-based missile capabilities, under the new START agreement.
As Congress requested and with Secretary Gates’ full support, this review has been a full interagency partnership.
We believe we have developed a broad and deep consensus on the importance of the President’s agenda and the steps we must take to achieve it. The results will be presented to Congress soon.
In April, the President will also host a Nuclear Security Summit to advance his goal of securing all vulnerable nuclear material within four years.  We cannot wait for an act of nuclear terrorism before coming together to share best practices and raise security standards, and we will seek firm commitments from our partners to do just that.
In May, we will participate in the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference. We are rallying support for stronger measures to strengthen inspections and punish cheaters.
The Treaty’s basic bargain - that nuclear powers pursue disarmament and non-nuclear states do not acquire such weapons, while gaining access to civilian nuclear technology - is the cornerstone of the non-proliferation regime.
Before the treaty was negotiated, President Kennedy predicted a world with up to 20 nuclear powers by the mid-1970s.  Because of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the consensus it embodied, that didn’t happen.
Now, 40 years later, that consensus is fraying.  We must reinforce this consensus, and strengthen the treaty for the future.
 
And, while we do that, we will also continue our efforts to negotiate a ban on the production of fissile materials that can be used in nuclear weapons.  
We know that completing a treaty that will ban the production of fissile material will not be quick or easy - but the Conference on Disarmament must resume its work on this treaty as soon as possible.
The last piece of the President’s agenda from Prague was the ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
A decade ago, we led this effort to negotiate this treaty in order to keep emerging nuclear states from perfecting their arsenals and to prevent our rivals from pursuing ever more advanced weapons.  
We are confident that all reasonable concerns raised about the treaty back then – concerns about verification and the reliability of our own arsenal - have now been addressed.  The test ban treaty is as important as ever.
As President Obama said in Prague, “we cannot succeed in this endeavor alone, but we can lead it, we can start it.”
Some friends in both parties may question aspects of our approach. Some in my own party may have trouble reconciling investments in our nuclear complex with a commitment to arms reduction. Some in the other party may worry we’re relinquishing capabilities that keep our country safe.
With both groups we respectfully disagree. As both the only nation to have used nuclear weapons, and as a strong proponent of non-proliferation, the United States has long embodied a stark but inevitable contradiction. The horror of nuclear conflict may make its occurrence unlikely, but the very existence of nuclear weapons leaves the human race ever at the brink of self-destruction, particularly if the weapons fall into the wrong hands.
Many leading figures of the nuclear age grew ambivalent about aspects of this order. Kennan, whose writings gave birth to the theory of nuclear deterrence, argued passionately but futilely against the development of the hydrogen bomb. And Robert Oppenheimer famously lamented, after watching the first mushroom cloud erupt from a device he helped design, that he had become “the destroyer of worlds.”
President Obama is determined, and I am as well, that the destroyed world Oppenheimer feared must never become our reality. That is why we are pursuing the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons. The awesome force at our disposal must always be balanced by the weight of our shared responsibility. 
Every day, many in this audience help bear that burden with professionalism, courage, and grace.
A grateful nation appreciates your service. Together, we will live up to our responsibilities. Together, we will lead the world. 
Thank you. 
May God bless America. 
May God protect our troops.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 23, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden in a Joint Statement with Prime Minister Fischer
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: It's an honor to be with you, and an honor to be in this magnificent city of Prague. It's been a while since I've been here, and I'm delighted to be back, particularly on what is essentially a historic anniversary. It's been five years since the Czech Republic joined the European Union, 10 years since its association with NATO, and 20 years since the Velvet Revolution, which literally -- literally inspired the world.
As Prime Minister Fischer indicated -- and as we were walking down, I think he agrees we had a very good -- we had a very good meeting, and a very good discussion. And while we paid tribute to the past, we spent the bulk of our time talking about the present, and about the future.
One of the high points of my career as a United States Senator, where I served for over 36 years, was being the leader in the Senate on the expansion of NATO to include Central Europe, particularly the Czech Republic. I told the Prime Minister that the Czech Republic has validated every argument I was making back then. You've made me look very, very good in retrospect, Mr. Prime Minister, your country has. There were skeptics then. I know of none now. We see that every day in our relationships. We see that every day in Afghanistan, where our troops are serving side by side, where you are running a provincial reconstruction team in the Logar province, where you are training Afghani police, and where you will soon send back a special operations unit.
And as a parent of one who has served in Iraq and overseas for a year, let me say on behalf of the President of the United States, and me, personally -- to the parents, the husbands, the wives, the children of those deployed Czech forces -- we appreciate the sacrifice that you are making -- not just the troops, but the families. A famous Englishman once said, they who serve -- "also serve who stand and wait." So our appreciation goes out to the parents, the husbands, the wives, and the children of those deployed forces. We want you to know how grateful we are for the service and sacrifice of your troops -- your children, your husbands, your fathers -- and the burdens that that deployment places upon them.
I'm also pleased to return to the site where President Obama made his first trip to Europe, where he demonstrated again America's commitment to the transatlantic relationship and alliance and to a strong Europe, by attending the special summit with a -- with 27 E.U. leaders, and where he laid out America's vision for the world without nuclear weapons. The Prime Minister and I talked about NATO’s commitment to produce a new strategic concept, which will adapt our alliance to the threats of the 21st century, to the 21st century.
Ladies and gentlemen, I urged the Prime Minister to make sure that the final product has a distinctly Czech accent. I know it will, by the way, because one of our great former Secretaries of State, Madeleine Albright, is chairing the experts' committee that will advise NATO on this critical strategy, and she always speaks from her heart with a Czech accent.
One of the new threats to our common security comes from the spread of ballistic missiles, a growing number of which now can reach Europe. The Czech Republic stepped up and did their part in the previous missile defense plan, and today we discussed the potential role the Czech Republic could play in a new architecture, a better architecture -- an architecture that has the capacity to actually protect Europe and is not just focused on the United States of America.
And I'm very appreciative of the Prime Minister's statement to me that the Czech Republic is ready to be a part of that new architecture, and discuss the terms of this -- that this participation will take. He affirmed to me that this is a very important project for Europe, and we appreciate that, and are looking forward to working with him and the government.
A high-level defense team will come to Prague in early November to discuss this as well as defense cooperation in a range of areas. The new missile defense program is designed to meet existing threats in Europe with proven technology that will cover more of Europe, including the Czech Republic, more effectively than the previous system could have done. It also strengthens NATO's defenses against future, more advanced missile threats.
We also discussed energy security, where the Czech Republic has been a leader in Europe. And we appreciate Prague's efforts to promote greater interconnectivity for the E.U.'s gas and electric networks, greater diversification of supply and routes, including the pipeline -- the Nabucco pipeline project -- and we discussed the venture, the effort for you to diversify in the nuclear area as well.
I told the Prime Minister how much we appreciate -- and I mean it sincerely -- the Czech Republic’s leadership, which goes to the heart of our future security and our prosperity.
As you celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Velvet Revolution, Mr. Prime Minister, I think it's important for you to understand, because you were in the middle of it, all of you, and I don't think you can fully appreciate how much you inspired the world at the moment. And I hope you appreciate and understand that there are -- you are the model. You are the model as I travel through Eastern Europe -- as I travel to Ukraine and Georgia and other places, you are the model for democracy that they look to. And I am confident with your leadership you will help them on that journey as they make their journey toward a full democracy.
And I thank the Prime Minister for hosting our delegation, for the quality of our conversation, and for the great weather he arranged today. (Laughter.) I appreciate it very, very much.
So I genuinely appreciate it, Mr. Prime Minister, and I look forward to continue to work with you.
Thank you.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 22, 2009
Opening Remarks by Vice President Biden at a Meeting with President of the Senate Geoana
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Well, thank you. I'm glad to see you again, happy to be with you. The main message that President Obama wanted me to communicate as I tour Central European nations is that Romania is a good friend. We are committed to the strategic partnership, or relationship. We think Article 5 means something. We believe very strongly in building the relationships, and quite frankly, looking to Romania to not only be a bridge to the Caucuses, but to be an example to other Eastern European nations as to how to move towards free-market economies and democracy. And you set a powerful example.
And I'd be remiss if I didn't say to the Romanian people how proud we are to stand with Romanian forces in Iraq and Afghanistan. Your soldiers are genuine warriors, they are warriors. There are no caveats. There are no limitations on them. They are brave, and they're the troops that American forces want to (inaudible) with. You should be incredibly proud of your troops, and we are incredibly proud and thankful for their service alongside us in the ISAF forces, particularly in Afghanistan.
So thank you to the mothers and fathers, and husbands and wives, and children of those 1,100 warriors who are taking risk of their time and their life on behalf of freedom. And we want to thank you. We want to thank those families.
END 
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 22, 2009
Remarks By Vice President Biden On America Central Europe And A Partnership for the 21st Century
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.  Director, Mr. Mayor, former Presidents who I've had the honor to meet in the past, it's good to be back in Romania.  And, Mr. Mayor, as we say in America, thank you for the passport to come into your city.  I appreciate it very much.
What a magnificent forum, what a magnificent forum.  And I say to all the students, thank you.  I'm honored that  .
Ladies and gentlemen, it's an honor to be back in Romania.  This is not my first trip, nor God-willing, will it be my last.  And it's great to be back in Central Europe to help mark an extraordinary season of change.  Twenty years ago, the world watched in awe and admiration as the men and women throughout this region broke the shackles of oppression and emerged a free people.
It's literally hard to imagine that this beautiful library was the scene of such heavy fighting in 1989.  I was reviewing pictures of what it looked like with tanks stationed outside.  Ladies and gentlemen, when the firing stopped and the smoke cleared, the façade of this building was scarred by shells and bullets.  Five hundred thousand books were burned, part of your history and your legacy.  And just blocks away, in University Square, some of freedom’s young defenders were struck down.  But their courage and conviction prevailed, and I hope and know set an example to all of you who followed.
When the Iron Curtain was lifted, the wall fell in Berlin, in their places grew democracy, a democracy that you've deserved for a long time.  Across Europe, a new sense of possibility took hold, galvanizing the region, uplifting a continent, and literally inspiring the world.  The story of freedom –- your story -- is one of the greatest achievements in modern history.  And it's important that we celebrate that remarkable -- that remarkable moment.  It's also important that we remember how far Central Europe has come in the last 20 years.
Early in my career as a United States Senator, a young senator then, I brought my two now grown sons, but then very young sons, to Central Europe as they reached their teenage years.  I took them immediately to Dachau, so they would begin to know what men and women are capable of at their worst, but also understand what men and women were capable of at their best.
I took them to the Berlin Wall.  I had them walk through Checkpoint Charlie, so that the rest of their lives, they'd remember, they'd understand that the freedom we sometimes take for granted was not a birthright for tens of millions of people on this continent.
And today, I come back to Central Europe and Romania, not only with an official delegation from the United States government, but with my 11-year-old granddaughter, Finnegan Biden.  Finnegan, stand up.  I want these people to see you.  (Applause.)  And my daughter, Kathleen Biden.  Would you stand up, Kathleen?  I'm going to embarrass you, I know.  (Applause.)    
I brought them along, because I want them to understand, particularly my granddaughter -- as my son learned -- I want them to see and understand first-hand the story of this region and of this continent.  My granddaughter is visiting museums and monuments that chronicle the turmoil of the 20th century in Poland, here and in the Czech Republic.
And she has seen with her own young eyes, she has seen in the people she meets and in the vibrancy of your cities and your streets the incredible, incredible possibilities of this 21st century.  She is a witness to a powerful fact: that the true validation of 1989, the real story of your country and this region lies less in what you tore down, and more in what you have built. 
Those of us who know about the bloodshed and the freedom fighters in Hungary in 1956; those who felt the chilling end to the warm Prague spring of 1968 in Wenceslas Square; those who shut down the shipyards in Gdansk in 1980; those here in Romania who endured the most ruthless totalitarian dictatorship in the latter half of the 21st [sic] century in Europe.  Each and every one was struggling not only against something, but for something -- for government, a government that responds to the needs of its people; for a more tolerant society, built on respect and dignity; for the freedom to think, to believe, and to pursue your dreams.
You have begun to realize those dreams that only the bold imagined 20 years ago -- a Europe whole and free, anchored in a European-Atlantic alliance institutions of NATO, and the European Union.
We Americans are incredibly proud to have been your partners in the peaceful reunification of Europe.  As President Obama said on the eve of NATO Summit last spring, and I quote him, "This shared history gives us hope –- but it must not give us rest.  This generation cannot stand still." 
We cannot stand still because we now face another season of change, another season of challenge -- an economic crisis that has hurt too many people and eroded their confidence, a war in Afghanistan now in its eighth year, and new forces shaping this young century.  Those new forces, among other things, include the spread of weapons of mass destruction and dangerous disease; the expanding chasm between the rich and poor; ethnic animosities and failed states; a rapidly warming planet and an uncertain supply of energy, food, water; the challenge to freedom and security posed by radical fundamentalism.
I come here today with a straightforward, simple message:  The United States and Europe, a Europe whole and united, will meet these challenges together, for that's the only way they can be met.  No amount of idle talk, no distortion of the facts, can chip away at this unassailable truth:  The United States of America remains committed to our alliance with Europe, which we Americans believe, and continue to believe, is the cornerstone of American foreign policy, as it has been, for the last 60 years.  We are all the more committed, because our European partners have grown broader and stronger.  We, the United States, cannot succeed without you.  And if you will forgive my presumption, I do not believe you can fully succeed without us.
I know that some in Central Europe look at the problems and responsibilities the United States has assumed around the world, and conclude that we have no longer focused -- we no longer are focused on this region of the world.  In fact, it's precisely because of our global responsibilities and your growing and capacity and willingness to meet them with us that we value our partnership with Central Europe and Europe now more than we ever had.  It's quite to the contrary. 
Together, we have responsibilities to shoulder, and we have promises to keep.  Those responsibilities are larger now, and the promises more significant.  We see Central Europeans rising to this moment, heeding the call to leadership of major regional and international institutions.  Twenty years ago, imagine the Presidency of the European Parliament, head of UNESCO, Chair of the Council in Europe, Justices on the European Court of Justice, Commissioners in the European Commission.  The time for Central Europe has come.  You have shown yourselves ready for our common challenges, willing to tackle them, and able to overcome them.  That's why in America, we no longer think in terms of what we can do for Central Europe, but rather in terms of what we can do with Central Europe.
First and foremost, we are bound together by shared values, and a common commitment to protect those values, whenever and wherever they are challenged.  NATO is the bedrock of that commitment.  One of the high points of my career was leading the effort as a United States Senator to expand NATO to Central Europe.  As a matter of fact, Mr. President, you'll remember, I suggested that Romania should be in the first tranche.  I was the one who fought until the very end to see it included in the first tranche.  Thank you for making me look so prescient, you've done so well.
As President Obama has said, there are no old members, there are no new members of NATO; there are just members.  Under Article 5, an attack on one is an attack against all.  Our countries are bound together by America’s dedication to European security –- and by Europe’s dedication to America’s security, which you demonstrated quickly and powerfully in the wake of 9/11, the first time Article 5 was invoked, without us asking. 
Today, we carry heavy responsibilities -- we, all of us.  Our sons and daughters, like my son, are serving side by side in Afghanistan, in Iraq, and in the Balkans.  For this -– for the courage of our friends and for their losses –- the American people are grateful. 
Our alliance was built around consultation and collaboration for collective defense.  That's what it is about.  But faced with new threats, we need a new vision on how to meet them, and new capabilities to succeed.
That's why the decision to develop what we call a new strategic concept for NATO is so very important -– and that's why it is so vital that Central European voices make themselves heard in this process. 
One powerful example of how this can work is our partnership on -- our new approach to missile defense.
 
In the 20th century, NATO successfully prepared to defend Allied territory against what was then a very real Soviet challenge on what we all used to call the "central front" that divided Europe.  Today, a new major threat is growing that could reach all of our European allies well before it reaches the United States.  It comes from ballistic missiles -- short-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles -- a technology that has spread to many new countries, and less stable countries, since the end of the Cold War.  This technology, coupled with the spread of nuclear know-how, poses a great threat to all of us. 
And we are determined -- we are determined to ensure that our NATO allies have the protection they need when they need it, because that's our solemn obligation under Article 5.  Taking into account how the threat has evolved, and how our technology has improved significantly, the United States believes there is a better way to defend against ballistic missiles than the approach we had been pursuing up until several years ago. 
This phased adaptive approach the United States is proposing, it has adapted its design to meet the growing threat to Europe, with a proven technology that will cover more of Europe –- including Central Europe –- more effectively than the previous approach. 
It meets the missile threats of today, and allows us to improve our defenses against that threat well into the future.  Its flexibility will enable us to adapt if the threat changes.  Its very existence will deter those who might think about coercing or attacking our forces, or our allies in Europe –- and it will defend them, our friends in Europe, against that threat should deterrence fail.  Simply put, our missile defense plan means greater security for Europe, and greater security for America.
Some -- maybe even understandably -- jump to the conclusion that this new missile defense approach was meant to appease Russia at the expense of Central Europe.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  That is absolutely wrong.  Missile defense is not about Russia.  Our approach is driven by security requirements of the United States and our NATO allies, period.  Period.   
What is true is that we are working to strengthen our relationship with Russia.  We believe that a more constructive relationship with Russia will benefit all.  But we're not naïve.  The truth is we share some common interests:  cutting the arsenals of nuclear weapons; securing vulnerable nuclear materials; stabilizing Afghanistan; preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
And we also continue to have disagreements with Russia on matters of basic principle.  In February, in Munich, Germany, in the very first major foreign policy speech of our administration, I enunciated our administration's outline for foreign policy, and I made clear our core principles.  The United States stands against the 19th century notion of "spheres of influence."  We will not tolerate it, nor will we be co-opted by it.  
We stand for the right of sovereign democracies to make their own decisions, to choose their own alliances, without the right of any country to veto those decisions.  We will never make a deal about anything with anyone above your heads or behind your backs.  The maxim we live by is clear:  nothing about you without you, nothing about you without you.  And I would argue, look at our track record, look at our track record. 
We’ve all learned over the past two years that as the globe around us shrinks, the bonds between us grow.  We are partners in today’s global economy.  That’s why we worked with our European partners -- the IMF and the World Bank -- to make sure international support for your economies was there when you needed it most.
That’s why it's heartening to see how many of you have successfully braved this worldwide recession and put your nations on the road to recovery.  And working together, we can all learn lessons from this crisis that will help us lay the foundation for a renewed century of growth and to rebuild prosperity. 
One lesson we need to work together toward is a more secure energy future.  We need sustainable energy security that includes diversification of supplies and transit routes, smart investments to deal with climate change.  The connections between European countries should exist not just through European countries.  Here, in this region -- by history, geography and necessity -- the countries of Central Europe are well placed to lead all of Europe.
Ladies and gentlemen, finally, let me say a word about leadership in an area that Central Europeans are uniquely qualified to provide -- the advocacy of democracy.  Americans, I believe, are rightly proud that people around the world occasionally look to our example, and look for our leadership.  But the truth of the matter is you are the model for millions -- not us, you -- Romania and other Central European countries.  The example you set 20 years ago inspired the world.  The leadership you exert over the next 20 years can change that world, encouraging, supporting, and consolidating young democracies in Central and Eastern Europe. 
In Eastern Europe, countries still struggle to fulfill the promise of a strong democracy, or a vibrant market economy.  Who to look to better than you?  Who to look to better than Central European countries that 20 years ago acted with such courage and resolve, and over the last 20 years, have made such sustainable progress?  You can help guide Moldova, Georgia, Ukraine along the path of lasting stability and prosperity.  It's your time to lead.  Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus can benefit from your personal experiences.  The E.U. Eastern Partnership Initiative is a good example of how you can energize the effort.  And we will partner with you in working to fulfill the promise of 1989.  But your leadership needs to be bold and your voices loud. 
There’s an old Romanian proverb:  "The cheapest article is advice.  The most valuable is a good example."  You are the "good example."  Twenty years ago, the people of Central Europe took the world history that they inherited, and willed it in a new direction toward greater freedom, justice, and fairness.  The odds were stacked against you.  We know from history that destroying old oppressive regimes is a great deal easier than building new flourishing democracies.  But you've delivered on the promise of your revolution.  You are now in the position to help others do the same.
Speaking to our Congress 20 winters ago, Vaclav Havel pointed to a special sense of empathy and imagination the people of Central Europe share.  Years of subjugation, he said, "have given us, however unintentionally, something positive:  a special capacity to look somewhat further than someone who has not undergone this bitter experience."  He went on to say: "A person who cannot move and live a normal life because he is pinned under a boulder has more time to think about hopes than someone who is not trapped in this way."  He was right.
Now you have the freedom to act on those hopes, and you are.  And I believe together we can turn that hope that we shared into a history we can be proud of.  This is the moment.  You students, if we are smart, brave, and lucky will be able to tell your grandchildren you were present at the creation of a new Europe, a new security, a new era of peace, because you were bold enough to seize that moment.  Be like those in '89.  Be bold.  Exercise your leadership.  You have a history, and you have a tradition.  You can make a gigantic difference.  And we'll stand with you.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for listening.  And may God bless America and all of our allies.  And may God protect all of our troops who are in harm's way.  Thank you very, very much.  It's been an honor to be here.  (Applause.)
END                                       
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 22, 2009
Remarks By Vice President Biden in a Joint Statement with President Basescu
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Well, Mr. President, thank you for your hospitality.  You know, diplomats and high-level politicians always walk out of meetings saying, we had a frank and useful discussion.
Well, we did have a frank and very useful discussion, and I appreciate your insight, and I appreciate your leadership.
I am very pleased to be here today with the President in this magnificent palace.  The United States and Romania have been, and continue to be, close allies and partners in NATO.  And the European-Atlantic alliance is something that I know the President, and President -- my President, President Obama, strongly, strongly support.  And we deeply, deeply value Romania's cooperation.
You know, I was telling the -- I was telling the President, he and his country have made me look very good.  I argued very, very strongly that Romania be admitted into NATO on the first round, as you'll remember.  I was -- and I tried to the very end, as chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.  Now look how smart I was.
The fact of the matter is, all kidding aside, you've been a tremendous partner -- Romania has been.  And it's -- Romania -- as you start this election season, Mr. President, it reminds me of our own intense political campaigns last year.  And this is the type of -- this is the type of competition, healthy competition that's essential, essential to a vibrant democracy.  And I wish you success in your electoral process, and congratulate the remaining people on what is nothing less than a thriving democracy.
We have -- as we approach our 130th anniversary -- 130th anniversary of our diplomatic relationships to Romania, we want to continue to strengthen what I would argue is already a strong partnership, already a strong partnership.
Our relationship is anchored in interests that are of shared values, working together on global threats, human rights, commercial investment, and trade promotion.  It's the full panoply of things that countries who treat each other as equals deal with.  And our cooperation is both bilateral and multi-lateral, both through NATO and the E.U., but also through our bilateral negotiations and relationships.
We serve together in Afghanistan, in the western Balkans, and in Iraq. And I feel obliged to tell the Romanian people how grateful President Obama and I, and the American people, are for the Romanian troops that are in Afghanistan.  Let me say something as clearly as I can, your troops are warriors, they are warriors.  They have no caveats.  Our troops -- and I mean this sincerely, and my son just got back from Iraq after a year as a captain in the United States Army.  Our troops -- our troops are proud to serve next to Romanian troops, because you are incredibly competent.  Your kids -- I wish I could -- I wish you could all see, as I get to see, just how incredibly competent they are.  You should be proud.
And all the mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, husbands and wives of those 1,100 Romanians that are stationed in Afghanistan -- I mean this sincerely, as a parent -- thank you.  Thank you, thank you, thank you.  There's an old expression attributable to an Englishman. He said, "Those also serve who stand and wait.  Those also serve who stand and wait."  So we not only owe your troops that are deployed, Mr. President, we owe their families.  We genuinely owe them.  And I want to, on behalf of the President of the United States of America, say we appreciate it, and we're proud -- proud to stand next to you and serve with you.
In Afghanistan, your forces are performing skillfully, and in some of the toughest places, the toughest combat.  The United States is grateful for the circus -- service, as well as the sacrifice.  And I want to make one other point as it relates to the strategic side of the relationship.  I really -- with regard to defense, Mr. President, I really appreciate your embrace, and your government's embrace, of the new missile defense architecture that we are introducing into Europe.  There is -- the SM-3 will replace what originally was going to be intended to provide for security.  But it will -- in fact, it is a much better architecture.  It has the benefit of protecting Europe physically, as well as the United States.  And I must tell you I appreciate your almost instant embrace of this new architecture, as well as was embraced by our colleagues in Poland, and others.  As people look at this, they are understanding what you understood from the beginning, that this makes more sense.
We share a desire that -- as well, that Romania's neighbors, including Moldova, will continue along the path toward democratization and economic reform, and that they will be integrated into the Euro-Atlantic institutions when they are ready.  And that's why, as you pointed out, we are participating in helping to hopefully stabilize, economically, Moldova.
And, Mr. President, you and I also discussed energy security issues, the role of Romania and what -- the role you're playing in supporting and developing pipelines, as well as other transit methods to bring new sources of energy to Europe.  I can think of nothing that would be more consequential than that.  And we appreciate your leadership, and the leadership of your country.
And I also would point out that we have an ambassador here -- America, in my view, has sent their best.  But I have to, as we say -- in the United States Senate, there's an expression.  When you stand up on the floor of the Senate, if you're going to talk about something personally, Mr. President, we say, please excuse the point of personal privilege.  And full disclosure, our ambassador is my best personal friend.  We have raised each other's children.  We have -- our wives are close friends.  My grandchildren are -- consider the Gitenstein's to be almost relatives.  So I can assure you first-hand, this is a man I've worked with for 35 years -- 30 years, actually -- and he has my ear.  I know you've already figured that out, because I know you've gone to him and you know he immediately picks up the phone and calls me.  I hope you won't take advantage of my friendship with the ambassador too badly.
But he is new here, but his diplomatic skills and his erudition I think will serve us both well, Mr. President.  He has a direct line, as I said, to me, and he is very effective.  And I'm confident -- I'm confident that our ties with Romania will continue to thrive, will continue to thrive together with our advance of shared objectives of a free and peaceful Europe.
I'll conclude, Mr. President, by saying something that reminded me of my country, of America, the last thing you said, which is what we say, but we don't always hear.  You said, Mr. Vice President, I want to assure you no matter who wins this election, Romania will remain a strong and vital partner to the United States.  That's what democracies are built on.  That's what long-term alliances thrive on.
And so I wish you all the good luck, the people of Romania, and in the conduct of this election.  And I envy the fact that it's only going to last 30 days.  Ours go on considerably longer.  But at any rate, Mr. President, thank you for your hospitality, also for allowing us the opportunity to meet with your -- your staff, and your defense minister, and others.  We have a lot of work to do, but it's good to be back in Romania.  It is one of the most beautiful countries in the world, and I feel so much better than the first trip I took here decades ago about the progress you've made and the partnership reform.
So thank you very much.
PRESIDENT BASESCU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Vice President.  If you allow me to mention something extremely important for us, the Romanian army is the single army which have -- Romanian officers are the single foreign officers which have under command American troops -- is the situation in Afghanistan.  And this is a proof how far the relations between Romania and United States --
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  It is the first time that has ever happened, so obviously we trust your officer corps.  Thank you very, very much.
PRESIDENT BASESCU:  Thank you very much.  Thank you again.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 21, 2009
Remarks By Vice President Biden in a Joint Statement with President Kaczynski
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Mr. President, thank you for your hospitality.  And I apologize to your colleagues, when two old friends get together, they tend to talk.  You know how diplomats always walk out and say, we had a frank and thorough discussion?  Well, we had a discussion friends have, we talked about everything.  And had we the time, and were we not cognizant of people's schedules, we probably would have talked for another two hours. 
But, Mr. President, I am proud to stand here with you, and I think our meeting was productive.  I know of no problem of consequence we have with Poland.  I know of no consequential problem.  I know of no problem that is not able to be resolved as they emerge.  Poland has a decided disadvantage in the relationship -- they own a part of our heart, and that is a disadvantage, Mr. President, we have.
My daughter-in-law comes from the second largest Polish city in the world, Chicago.  But all kidding aside, it was a great discussion, and we discussed a broad range of mutual interests.  I think if I could add on to what the President said, we both see the relationship as being rooted in security, but much beyond that, it's much beyond that.  Poland, in 20 years, has moved from a country that in fact we looked at in terms of what we could do for, to a country as to what we can do jointly with, how we can jointly address the problems and opportunities that we face as genuine partners.
So there's a broad range of mutual interests, and our joint commitment to the NATO effort, to Afghanistan on.  By the way, I expressed my deep appreciation -- I, like the President, have visited the troops on more than one occasion in Afghanistan.  The Polish soldiers in Afghanistan are not just soldiers, they are warriors.  They are warriors.  They are doing an incredibly difficult job, and I wish every Pole could see just how brave and steadfast they are.  You would be incredibly proud, incredibly proud, as I was, to have the opportunity to know and see where they were.
As a matter of fact -- it is just part of my DNA, as they say -- but I'm going to go from here to meet with men and women of the Polish armed forces later today, to let them know how much I truly appreciate -- and I mean this sincerely, this is not a diplomatic nicety.  The President and I truly appreciate -- truly appreciate the sacrifices that the Polish military is making.  And I'm going to meet with decorated Polish war veterans who have served in Afghanistan.
I understand, like all parents -- my son just got back from a year in Iraq.  I understand the anxiety of every Polish mother and father, husband and wife, son and daughter.  And I just want you to know it may not be a big deal, but it's a big deal to me.  It's a big deal that you all know that we generally appreciate and recognize the sacrifice not only the soldiers in the field are making, but the families who are left at home.
There's a famous expression attributable to another man, not me.  It says that, "they also serve who stand and wait.  They also serve who stand and wait."  So we owe a debt of obligation to the mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, and children of those brave Polish soldiers. 
We also reaffirmed -- I reaffirmed -- President Obama's absolute determination to secure and ensure NATO's success in the 21st century is matched by the -- matches the success of the 20th century.  I briefed the President on Secretary Clinton's -- we talked in depth about Russia.  And we talked in depth about the -- our mutual desire to see better relations with Russia.  We also talked about my recent trip to Ukraine and to Georgia, and our similar views and concerns that we have relative to both countries.
The President and I discussed the leading role that Poland can play if it chooses to play -- and I believe it will, but that's a decision made by Poland -- on national missile defense within NATO -- within NATO.  And I welcome the President's support for the missile defense, and for Poland's offer to host a standard missile, this so-called SM-3s, in a third stage. 
President Obama has a phased adaptive approach to missile defense that I believe -- I don't believe, I know -- strengthens missile defense for Europe unlike its ever existed, reinforces Article 5, and it will bolster the alliance's deterrent capability overall.  Simply put, it's better for NATO, it's better for Poland, it's better for Europe, it's better for the United States.  It's a more adaptable, rational, and workable system. 
And I want to thank the President, and the Polish people, for the hospitality they’ve shown during my visit to Warsaw.  I was reminiscing with some of my colleagues prior to arriving -- and I mentioned this at a previous meeting -- that how far Poland has come, the incredible sacrifices the Polish people have made over the past century and a half longer, but in modern history, and the distance they have traveled in the last 20 years.  It's absolutely remarkable. 
And I was discussing this with my national security advisor in the way over, in the car.  As I rode through Warsaw in the last -- the first -- well, the most recent time I was here, was when we were deciding -- we, me and others -- pushing for the admission of Poland into NATO in the mid-'90s.  And the discussion then was if Poland would be a partner in NATO -- Poland clearly wanted to be -- if it would be.  We were pushing with all of our allies for the admission of Poland into NATO.  And I look now, and here we are, not just talking about whether or not Poland is a part of NATO, but the vital role Poland is playing within NATO. 
And I assured -- in conclusion, I assured the President that no one should misunderstand our commitment -- NATO's commitment and the United States' commit -- to the security of Poland is unalterable.  It will not change.  It has not changed.  The only thing that's changed is the admission of Poland into NATO, making NATO stronger than it was.
So, Mr. President, I thank you very much for your hospitality.  And I apologize to all of you, because we got to talking, and we ended up spending two hours together in a private meeting.  But it was -- I benefited greatly from the discussion, Mr. President.  Thank you for your hospitality, and I'll see you all.  Thank you. 
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
  October 21, 2009
Remarks By Vice President Biden In a Joint Statement With Prime Minister Tusk
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Mr. President, thank you very much. You know, it's remarkable, I was thinking as I rode over to see you, that one of my last visits to Poland was to meet with your predecessors, and then to give a speech at Warsaw University, discussing -- as I was pushing very hard -- the admission of Poland into NATO. I had the great honor of leading that effort in the United States Senate, which ratifies those treaties. And to think how far we've come, how far Poland has come. You are already shouldering significant responsibility.
The reference that the Prime Minister made was I think we've moved from a relationship of only being the notion of that we would provide security, which we will, but also moving to the relationship where we work together, we work together and not for, but with one another.
And so, Mr. President, it's a great pleasure -- Mr. Prime Minister, it's a great pleasure to meet with you. To state the obvious -- and I don't think it needs restating, but its worth it anyway. To state the obvious, Poland -- Poland is one of our closest allies and critical partners in facing global challenges.
As you all -- already all know, Poland a long time ago captured the heart of the American people. But it also has the heart of our government, through Democratic and Republican administrations. The people in the United States and Poland have deep historic ties that sometimes are sort of mentioned as if they are not so consequential. They are incredibly consequential. They run deep. We share values, and ideals, and countless friendships over the years, and particularly now.
The United States, Mr. Prime Minister, deeply appreciates the service of the -- and sacrifice of your Polish soldiers, who are real warriors. I've been there, I've been in Afghanistan. I've seen them. They are genuine warriors, and they are making great sacrifices. And I know are proud of them, but we are thankful. We are thankful for your soldiers standing alongside of ours in Afghanistan, also in Iraq and the Balkans. And it's an honor -- it's an honor to stand with you in these difficult but vital deployments, Mr. Prime Minister.
Our two countries are bound together by an American commitment to Poland's security beyond the longstanding ties literally through Article 5 of the Washington treaty, NATO, and by Poland's commitment to our security, which you demonstrated I might add, through Article 5 on September the 11th. Without hesitation, you and NATO responded and said an attack on one is an attack on all. Under NATO's Article 5, an attack on one is an attack on all. And this strategic assurance is absolute, absolute, Mr. Prime Minister.
As one who championed the admission of Poland into NATO, I would also point out that we take not only our mutual commitments seriously, but I take it very, very seriously. President Obama and I consider this to be a solemn obligation. President Obama has said, and this is a promise he said not only for our time, but for all time. We appreciate Poland has stepped up and agreed to host an element of the previous missile defense plan.
And we now appreciate that Poland's government agrees with us that there is now a better way, a better way -- with new technology and new information -- to defend against the emerging ballistic missile threats. Our new phased adaptive approach to missile defense is designed to meet a growing threat not only to the United States, but first and foremost to Europe. It's going to meet it with proven technology that will cover more of Europe, including Poland, and will do it more efficiently than the previous system could have, or did. It strengthens missile defense for Europe, it strengthens Article 5, and it strengthens the alliance's deterrent  capability. Mr. Prime Minister, we have -- we have a lot to do. Simply put, our missile plan is better security for NATO, and is better security for Poland, and ultimately better security for the United States of America. 
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
September 21, 2009
Remarks by Dr. Jill Biden at Hudson Valley Community College
THE WHITE HOUSE
 _______________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release:                                          September 21, 2009

REMARKS BY DR. JILL BIDEN
Hudson Valley Community College
Troy, New York
September 21, 2009

DR. BIDEN: Thank you.
Good morning everyone and thank you. 
I’m Jill Biden and I am honored to be a community college professor. 
I’ve been an English teacher for almost 30 years, and I’ve spent much of my career on campuses just like this one.  In fact, tomorrow I will be back in my classroom at a community college not too far from the White House.   So I feel right at home here at Hudson Valley Community College.
People often ask me why I chose to teach at a community college.  And the answer is simple:  it is because every day my students inspire me -- with their commitment, their struggles, and their belief in education as the best hope for a brighter future for themselves and their families. 
I have seen firsthand the power of community colleges to change lives and serve as a gateway to opportunity for students at all stages of their lives and careers.  I know that the education gained on campuses just like this one will provide the knowledge that will power the American and global economies in the 21st Century. 
President Obama knows it too. 
I have always said that community colleges are America’s best kept secrets - but this Administration has recognized their value from day one. 
President Obama is making an historic and unprecedented commitment to higher education and bringing more students to colleges like Hudson Valley so, they, too, can gain the skills and the confidence they need to succeed in a new era.
I can’t think of a better investment in America’s future.
I’m proud to be here as a community college instructor - but I am especially proud to introduce a President who not only recognizes the value of higher education, but is committed to making it a reality for more Americans.
Please welcome President Barack Obama.

###
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
July 22, 2009
Remarks By Vice President Biden In Ukraine
THE WHITE HOUSE
   ______________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                    July 22, 2009
 
REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN IN UKRAINE
Ukraine House
Kyiv, Ukraine
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN:  Thank you very much.  Thank you, Jorge, Reverend, clergy.  Ladies and gentlemen, it's an honor to be here.  I want to thank you for your coming today.  And I want to thank the people and the government of Ukraine for their warmth and hospitality they've shown me the last two days.
It's a special honor to be here in Kyiv.  I know times are difficult for many today, but I’m inspired, and still inspired, as many Americans are, by what happened here less than five years ago.  That sea of orange that flooded Independence Square, the hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians who poured into Kyiv demanding peacefully that their votes be counted and that their voices be heard, is something that will not be forgotten for a long, long time.

Forty years before that momentous event, the momentous events of 2004, a former President of the United States and general, Dwight D. Eisenhower, stood in the center of Washington, DC, and unveiled a monument to a great Ukrainian poet, Shevchenko.  It was 24 feet high, the statue, and it bears these words:  "Dedicated to the liberation, freedom, and independence of all captive nations."
Back in 1964, we looked at Shevchenko for hope because he never stopped dreaming of a free Ukraine.  And 40 years later, in 2004, we saw what the power of a free people demanding justice could accomplish.  Today, Ukrainians should take pride in what they have achieved.  Free and fair elections have become the norm, freedom of speech is exercised vigorously, as you're all learning and observing, and freedom of the press, as witnessed by the number of cameras that are here today, is well respected in your country. 
Ukraine today is one of the most free and democratic nations in this region.
Near the end of his life, one of the authors of America’s freedom, Thomas Jefferson, who is credited with writing the Declaration of Independence, wrote a letter to his old friend and political foe, John Adams -- Adams had been the second President of the United States and Jefferson the third -- and they were great friends but political competitors.  And he wrote a letter to Adams -- there was a long correspondence for decades.  He wrote a letter to Adams about 35 years after our revolution.  And in the letter, he said, "The generation which commences a revolution rarely completes it.  The generation which commences a revolution rarely completes it."
In any true democracy, freedom is the beginning, not the end.  Freedom is merely the beginning, not the end.  And here in Ukraine, yours is a revolution still in progress whose promise remains to be fulfilled.
More than anything else, I’m here to say this to the Ukrainian people: Ukraine, as it continues on the path to freedom, democracy, and prosperity, the United States will stand by Ukraine.  These are your choices, not ours.  But rest assured that we stand with you as you make those choices.
The Obama administration will not waver in its support of a strong and independent Ukraine.  Charting the future course of Ukraine is, of course, a decision to be made by all of you, not by anyone outside.
Based on my discussions yesterday with the bulk of your political leadership, we want for Ukraine what it appears Ukrainians want for themselves -- a democratic and prosperous European nation.
My visit to Kyiv comes soon after President Obama’s visit to Moscow.
As a matter of fact, they were planned simultaneously.  And I know there was some speculation that our decision, as I said in a speech in Munich at the front-end of our administration -- to press the reset button with Moscow -- I know it created some speculations that improving relations with Russia would somehow threaten our ties with Ukraine.

Let me say this as clearly as I can.  As we reset the relationship with Russia, we reaffirm our commitment to an independent Ukraine.
And we recognize no sphere of influence, or no ability of any other nation to veto the choices an independent nation makes as to with whom and under what conditions they will associate.  We also do not believe in zero-sum thinking.  We do not believe that a partnership with one nation must come at the expense of another.  It has not.  It does not, and it will not.
As I said, referencing the Munich Security Conference just weeks after taking office, it holds true again -- I want to reemphasize it.  We reject the notion of spheres of influence as 19th century ideas that have no place in the 21st century.  And we stand by the principle that sovereign states have a right to make their own decisions, to chart their own foreign policy, to choose their own alliances. 
President Obama, in his speech in Moscow two weeks ago, strongly affirmed this principle.  He said, and I quote, "State sovereignty must be the cornerstone of international order.  Just as all states should have the right to choose their leaders, states must have the right to borders that are secure, and to their own foreign policies.  Any system that cedes those rights will lead to anarchy.  That is why this principle must apply to all nations, including Ukraine."
We also re-affirmed the security assurances that the United States, Russia and the United Kingdom provided Ukraine in the 1994 Budapest Memorandum.
Our commitment to Ukraine is evidenced through our aid program -- $120 million this year to bolster peace and security, strengthen democratic institutions, promote economic growth, modernize your military, secure Chernobyl, fight AIDS and HIV, and improve child health.
We also strongly supported, and continue to support, the IMF’s decision to provide $16 billion to help Ukraine make it through what is an incredibly difficult time as a consequence of a worldwide recession.

We have worked with Ukraine to transform your military, so that you can protect your homeland and contribute to global security.  Young Ukrainian officers have studied in our military academies.  American officers have come here to take part in education, training, planning, and organization and exercises.  And we’re grateful to Ukraine for its contributions to international security.  Ukraine’s armed forces have been committed peacekeepers from the Balkans to Iraq, even as far afield as Liberia.
And we mourn -- we mourn along with you -- the six Ukrainians who perished in last week’s helicopter crash in Afghanistan.  We have, unfortunately, significant experience in mourning.
Ukraine has also been a leader in what President Obama and I believe is our greatest security challenge -- the greatest security challenge that is facing the world -- and that is reducing the world’s arsenal of nuclear weapons, renewing the non-proliferation system, and securing vulnerable nuclear fissile material.
Last December, the United States and Ukraine agreed to a center on strategic -- excuse me, a Charter on Strategic Partnership.  And today, your president and I agreed that the U.S. and Ukraine Strategic Partnership Commission would begin meeting this fall in Washington to deepen our cooperation in areas of security, economy, trade, energy, and the rule of law.
The United States also supports Ukraine’s deepening ties to NATO and to the European Union.  But again, we recognize they are your decisions, your choices, not ours whether you choose the EU or seek to, or NATO.  We recognize that how far and how fast to proceed on your choices is, again, a uniquely Ukrainian choice -- it is not ours.

The United States does not seek a sphere of influence.  We are trying to build a multi-polar [sic*] world, in which like-minded nations make common cause of our common challenges -- the stronger our partners, the more effective our partnerships.
And in that spirit of partnership, I'm also here to offer my honest opinion.  Friendship requires honesty.  And the honest truth is that the great promise of the 2004 -- of 2004, has yet to be fully realized.  Again, if the poet Shevchenko were here today, what would he be writing?  What would he write about this moment?  I’m sure he would be heralding the openness and pluralism, the freedom of the press –- a model for your neighbors.  I'm sure he would take pride in Ukraine’s vibrant civil society and marvel at your competitive elections.
 And to those cynics who have asserted for centuries that this part of the world could never practice democracy because its culture and values are different, Ukraine today stands as resolute rebuttal to that centuries old assertion.

But I think he would also be wondering why the government was not exhibiting the same political maturity as the people, why communications among leaders has broken down to such an extent that political posturing appears to prevent progress. 
Especially now, especially in difficult economic times, Ukraine, in my humble opinion, must heed the lessons of history -- effective, accountable government is the only way to provide stable, predictable, and a transparent environment that attracts investment, which is the economic engine of development.  That's why this Chamber of Commerce, I suspect, exists.
Functioning democracies are more capable of committing to and implementing economic reforms, sometimes even painful reforms that are necessary to stimulate economic recovery and economic growth.  And I would note parenthetically, can you name me a place where democracy has flourished where the economic system has failed?  Mature democracies survive because they develop institutions such as a free press, a truly independent court system, an effective legislature -- all of which serve as a check on the corruption that fuels the cynicism and limits growth in any country, including yours.  And in a democracy, compromise is not a sign of weakness; it is evidence of strength.
In my meetings yesterday, there was a clear recognition that much work remains to be done to make Ukraine more competitive and attractive to investors, from reforming your tax code to acting against corruption.

The path to renewed prosperity runs through the International Monetary Fund, which is offering now a way out of the current crisis.  But as you might guess, there are strings attached.  My mother says, out of every crisis comes an opportunity.  This may be your opportunity.
The Fund requires that your government, and your government agreed to critical reforms to cut the budget deficit, revive a striving [sic*] banking system, and phase out energy subsidies, which I know from experience is a very difficult thing to do.  Carrying out this agreement requires very hard choices and tough action, but it will help put you on the road to growth and competitiveness.
And as a politician, I understand how difficult these decisions are.
But sometimes one has to ask why one is involved in politics in the first place.  Whenever a young man or woman asks me about what they should be thinking about if they wish to enter public life, I say, ask yourself the first and most important question:  What is it you care about that is worth losing over?  What is it that you care about that is worth losing over?  If you can't figure that out, then it's merely ambition that's driving you.  Every country needs politicians who know what is worth losing over.
 As you take action, you will not stand alone.  The United States wants to work with you to improve the investment climate, expand trade and investment between our two countries, and help in any effective way we can, knowing full well we do not have the answers.  We are struggling economically, as well; a different struggle, but a real struggle.

Ultimately, democracy and free markets will flourish when they deliver on what people want most -– honesty, the elimination of corruption, a decent job, the ability to care for their parents and educate their children, physical security and economic opportunity, a chance to build a better life.  No one wants anything more than a chance.

When democracy and free markets deliver on these basic desires, then those promoting alternative forms of government, whether from within or without, are never able to gain a foot hold.
Nowhere is the relationship between democracy, development and security clearer than when it comes to energy.  Right now, in the United States, we’re making significant efforts at some political expense, I might add, to diversify our energy supply, to invest in efficiency, and to make some very difficult decisions about how to deal with the carbon footprint we're leaving our children and our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren.  None are without cost.
Just as it is in our interest to diversify our sources of energy and reduce the influence of those we depend on for our energy, I might add so too it -- so too is it in your overwhelming interest.  Your economic freedom depends more, I suspect, in this country on your energy freedom than on any other single factor.  Ukraine has abundant reserves of energy, and reform of your energy sector should reduce your dependence on foreign suppliers.  Moving toward market pricing for energy is brave, but also absolutely necessary pre-condition.
Promoting energy efficiency and conservation also will go a long way toward increasing your independence.
Ukraine uses energy about three times less efficiently than the EU average, including your next-door neighbor, Poland.  If you lift Ukraine to European standards, your need for energy imports will dramatically decline, dramatically decline -- just that one single action, none other.  That would be a boon to your economy and an immeasurable benefit, I respectfully suggest, to your national security.
The time for inertia and neglect is long past.  It's time for action, as I know you know better than I.
I’m pleased that Ukraine and the United States have agreed to hold our first meeting of our working group on energy security, so that we can look together for solutions to some of today’s biggest challenges.
The leaders of this country come together -- came together once, in 2004, because they knew that a free and prosperous Ukraine was more important than any one political -- any one politician, or any one political party.  I have no doubt the Ukrainians can, and will, come together again.
When Shevchenko imagined freedom, he looked to the United States and its young revolution.  In the words of a poem he wrote in 1858, he said, "When will we greet our own George Washington at last with the new law of righteousness?  Today's American revolution is not so young.  And when the Shevchenkos of today imagine freedom, they don't have to look to the United States, they can rightfully look to Ukraine.
The idea and promise of Ukraine’s peaceful resolution -- revolution, remains an inspiration for the world and for this region.  Just as your Orange Revolution did not end in 2005, it did not stop at Ukraine’s borders.  We hear its echoes wherever people peacefully stand and demand their voices to be heard, a cacophony of voices, and they refer back to your Orange Revolution.
I have never met a Ukrainian -- my very good friend, John Hynansky, a very prominent businessman from Delaware is here.  I had breakfast with him the other day.  And I come from a city -- where I was born, Scranton, Pennsylvania, has a large Ukrainian-American population.
I've never met a Ukrainian who doesn’t think in terms of centuries.
Centuries from now, what will Ukrainians say of this time?  Will they say that their leaders?  Will they say they returned to the past?
Will they say that the beginning of the 21st century launched a new era of prosperity, freedom and independence, and hope for all Ukrainians?
I hope you choose the progress -- the path of progress, for the people of Ukraine, for your children, and for a watching world -- for literally, you are standing at a moment in history that you have never stood at before -- literally.  It sounds like hyperbole to suggest this, and we politicians have a tendency to hyperbole, but the God's truth is you have never been at this place before, the chance for your people to establish a truly independent, free and prosperous country with defined borders for the 21st century.
When your children look back, what will they say of us?  What will they say of what the United States did to help or not help?  And what will they say of all of you.  My sincere prayer is they will say that it was the beginning, the beginning of a dream we have dreamt for over 400 years.  I pray to God that happens, because quite frankly, your success will bear on the success or failure of many peoples in this part of the world.
I thank you for giving me the honor of being here, for listening.  And I sincerely hope that you understand I know we don't have all the answers, but I know your answer lies in freedom.  And freedom lies in the development of genuine democratic institutions.  I wish you the best, and we stand ready to walk that path with you.
Thank you very, very much.
END      
                       
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
July 21, 2009
Statement by Vice President Biden After Meeting with President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine
THE WHITE HOUSE
 ________________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                       July 21, 2009

STATEMENT BY VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN
AFTER MEETING WITH PRESIDENT VIKTOR YUSHCHENKO OF UKRAINE
House with Chimaeras
Kyiv, Ukraine
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Mr. President, thank you very much for your hospitality. And on behalf of President Obama, I want to express our admiration, as well as our thanks -- our admiration for what you and your colleagues began in what was an inspiration to other parts of the world and your neighbors, the Orange Revolution, and also thanks for your cooperation and help in the Balkans and Iraq and Afghanistan. And I agree with you, I think we had a very productive meeting.
I come to Kyiv, Mr. President, with one simple, straightforward message that I don't want anyone to misunderstand. That is, the United States is committed to a strong, democratic and prosperous Ukraine.
Your success, Mr. President, we believe will be our success. We in the United States are trying to build a multi-partner world in which we work with like-minded countries to make common cause on common challenges. And quite frankly, the stronger our partners, the more effective that partnership will be.
We worked together to tackle, as I referenced earlier, common security problems -- threats in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan -- and we meet what President Obama and I believe is one of humanity’s greatest challenges, and that is reducing nuclear arsenals and securing nuclear materiel.
We consider, Mr. President, Ukraine to be a vital European partner for advancing stability, prosperity and democracy on the continent. And the President and I agreed that the United States and Ukraine will work together in the months and years to come to strengthen the strategic partnership.
It is not for the United States to dictate what that partnership will be but to reiterate. And President Obama and I have stated clearly that if you choose to be part of Euro-Atlantic integration -- which I believe you have -- that we strongly support that. We do not recognize -- and I want to reiterate it -- any sphere of influence. We do not recognize anyone else's right to dictate to you or any other country what alliances you will seek to belong to or what relationships you -- bilateral relationships you have.
I reaffirmed to the President what I said in Munich, as I said, in the earliest days of our administration, and it's worth repeating again in a brief statement, and that is -- and President Obama, I might add, made it clear in his visit to Moscow this month -- the United States supports Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and freedom, and to make its own choices -- its own choices -- including what alliances they choose to belong.
We're working, as you know, Mr. President, to reset our relationship with Russia. But I assure you and all the Ukrainian people that it will not come at Ukraine’s expense. To the contrary, I believe it can actually benefit Ukraine. The more substantive relationship we have with Moscow, the more we can defuse the zero-sum thinking about our relations with Russia’s neighbors.
We also talked about many important challenges facing Ukraine today, made more difficult by the economic crisis the world is facing. And we discussed ways in which the United States can help Ukraine undertake what are obviously tough reforms needed to build its democracy and economy and to strengthen its energy sector.
To that end, I was pleased to learn that the government has taken the final decision necessary to bring the Overseas Private Investment Corporation back to Ukraine. That will make it easier for American companies to reinvest in Ukraine, and invest in the first place, which will help both our economies in the current downturn.
I know it's hard, I know it's hard, and these are tough decisions that your government has to make. And I also know from experience of being in public life for a long time, it's harder to make tough decisions in election years. It's a difficult time in any democracy. I told the President what I will tell other officials with whom I'll be meeting today, that working together, especially in times of crisis, is not a choice, it’s an absolute necessity. And compromise, I might add, is not a sign of weakness, it is evidence of strength.
Ukraine has come a long way in the short time since declaring independence in 1991. And Ukraine’s vibrant civil society -- and it is vibrant -- its engaged and free media, as we witnessed here today -- and its lively democracy show the world that Ukraine will continue on its chosen path toward a prosperous future as an integral part of Europe.
The United States, Mr. President, is committing to walking that path with Ukraine to see to it that it becomes a vital part of Europe.
And again, Mr. President, I want to thank you for your hospitality. I look forward to continuing the discussions we had today at a working group level, and I am -- I'm confident that Ukraine's democracy will take deep root in the 21st century.
Thank you, Mr. President.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
June 12, 2009
Commencement Address By Dr Jill Biden To Graduates Family Members And Faculty Of Kingborough Community College
THE WHITE HOUSE
 ___________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                     June 12, 2009

COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS BY DR. JILL BIDEN TO GRADUATES, FAMILY MEMBERS, AND FACULTY OF KINGSBOROUGH COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Kingsborough Community College
Brooklyn, NY
June 12, 2009
DR. BIDEN: Good morning. Thank you for inviting me for such an important day. And I want to say thank you to the Mayor and to Chuck and to all the elected officials.
And to Dr. Peruggi — and Marty — as the granddaughter of Dominic Giacoppa, I like that name too. Thanks to President Peruggi — your decades of work on behalf of higher education have been vital to the field and have helped turn Kingsborough into one of the top community colleges in America. I congratulate you.
And, today, I congratulate all of you. All of you graduates, all of your proud mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, sons and daughters. You did it! And I think you all deserve a round of applause.
The truth is — I feel right at home on a community college campus. I have been an educator for 28 years and have spent the last 16 at a community college. In fact, I continue to teach English at a college in Northern Virginia, not too far from the White House. There was never a question in my mind when we moved to Washington that I would continue to teach.
People often ask me why I choose to teach at a community college. Well — the answer is simple: It’s the students. It’s you. Because I know who you are:
You are Grace Simmons, who after 16 years as a lab technician lost her job and came here to Kingsborough College for retraining. You are graduating today, Grace, with a nursing degree, and I understand you have a job offer waiting at Lutheran Medical Center. Good for you!
You are Taheem Lomax. Stand up, Taheem. Taheem came to Kingsborough as the first in his family to go to college. He became one of 10 students to win a scholarship to study in Austria — the first time you ever left Brooklyn. Now you are transferring into a four-year college and pursuing your dream of starting a non-profit to help children around the world.
You are Jaqueline Carter-Cutting — born in Guyana and moved to the US in 2000. After being laid off from your job as a flight attendant in October of 2001, you joined the US Army Reserves. You were injured while serving abroad — and then you returned here to Kingsborough for your nursing degree. Graduating alongside you today is your daughter, Sherifah Carter.
You all came to this college at many different stages in life, and, today, after hard work and sacrifice, long hours and sleepless nights, you all walk across the same stage, having accomplished something no one can ever take away from you.
I am a community college teacher not simply because I hope to inspire you — but because you inspire me.
Every year, I meet students who have doubts, who are unsure of their destinies, unaware of the abilities they possess. And every year, around this time, I see those same students, in caps and gowns, walk across a stage and receive a diploma, knowing that, yes, they cast those doubts aside, and, yes, they did what they set out to do.
It’s a feeling you can get at most universities, but it’s especially strong at community colleges — where the gap between what is imagined at the beginning and what is achieved at the end can be so wide.
Just watching you close those gaps is exactly why I am a community college professor. I often say that my students are my heroes, and I am not exaggerating. You are all heroes. And today we celebrate your heroism.
The education you receive here at Kingsborough goes so far beyond the four corners of a diploma. So far outside the pages of an English textbook or the walls of a research lab.
What you have learned here is nothing so much as the confidence it takes to succeed, the knowledge that, hey, I set out to do this, and I did it, and now I can do so much more.
Years from now, you may not be able to recite the lines of poetry from your English textbooks; you may not be able to do the complex math problems you finally conquered — but you will be able to say, "No matter what is put in front of me, I can do it."
Over the last 16 years, I have seen firsthand the power of community colleges to change lives. And now the good news is — now we have a president, Barack Obama, who sees the same thing.
The President’s goal is for the United States to once again have the highest proportion of college graduates by the year 2020 — he knows community colleges will play a major part in achieving this goal. He also knows that community colleges are critical to the administration’s efforts to promote access to job training or additional education for unemployed Americans.
We know that community colleges have been meeting these critical needs for decades. This is nothing new to you. 
Community colleges are leaders in creating training programs for green jobs, for manufacturing, and for targeted areas like Kingsborough’s own marine technology program.
I have always said community colleges are one of America’s best-kept secrets — and now we have a president and an administration who are highlighting their contribution, bringing more students to colleges like Kingsborough, so they, too, can gain the skills and the confidence they need to succeed in a new era.
The education gained on campuses just like this will provide the knowledge that will power the 21st century. You’re not just here amassing knowledge; you’re sparking a quest for discovery that will last a lifetime.
Some of you will go on to four-year universities; some to graduate school; and some into the workforce. No matter where you go — let your education continue. Keep your eyes open to the world around you. And always see in others what they are capable of being and becoming.
See it. Pass it on. You need to inspire them. Show them the good that can come from a great education. Show them what they’re capable of. Show them, above all else, that they can do it too!
Thank you. Congratulations, graduates.
###
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
May 19, 2009
Prepared Remarks: Vice President Joe Biden Addresses Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Due to a problem with audio for transcription, only prepared remarks are available at this time.

THE WHITE HOUSE
  May 19, 2009
As Prepared for Delivery*
Vice President Joe Biden
Address to the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina
May 19, 2009
Thank you, Speaker Belkic. I see familiar faces from my many visits here as a Senator.
It is an honor and a privilege to return as Vice President of the United States.
President Obama and I recently completed our first one hundred days in the White House.
We are pursuing a far-reaching domestic and foreign policy agenda, listening to our friends and allies, rebuilding relationships and re-establishing American leadership in the world.
This is my third trip to Europe in four months.
President Obama made his first overseas trip to Europe in April.
This early emphasis on Europe was no accident.
We chose to spotlight the importance that the United States places on our European partners… and to energize those partnerships to address the challenges that we face together.
This is why I am so glad that my good friend Javier Solana, the EU High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy, is here today.
The English Author Rebecca West once wrote that entering Sarajevo was like "walking inside an opening flower."
That was true once, and it is again.
I remember flying into this city in 1993, seeing the large homes on our approach to the airport, and realizing that the homes had become shells, empty except for the snipers who had taken up residence.
In town, we saw buildings destroyed, the tops blown off, the sides pockmarked with bullets.
In 2001, the last time I was here, change seemed slow in coming.
It was in January, and it was winter. And it still felt as if the spring would never arrive.
Today, as I flew in, I saw something different – a city that is building again.
I saw cranes and construction.
On the streets, there were cars and shops and people walking freely.
As your city and your country continue to rebuild, to build and to grow, I want to talk today about how this country, this region, Europe, and the community of nations can grow towards one another.
Over the next several days, I will travel from here to Serbia and then to Kosovo. Our Deputy Secretary of State, Jim Steinberg, just visited Macedonia and Montenegro.
Our message is clear: the Obama-Biden administration will sustain and re-energize the long standing American commitment to a Europe that is whole, free, and at peace.
The door is open for the countries of this region to be a part of that Europe – and the United States will help you to walk through that door.
Many states in this region are already on the move:
In April, NATO Heads of State welcomed Albania and Croatia as new members of the Alliance.
Macedonia will join NATO as soon as the name dispute with Greece is resolved.
Montenegro is making steady progress on an ambitious reform agenda that will ensure the quickest-possible integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions.
When I travel to Belgrade tomorrow, I will tell President Tadic that the United States wants to build a new partnership with Serbia.
And we want to see Serbia take its rightful place in Europe as a strong, successful democratic state playing a constructive role in the region.
Serbia and the United States disagree on Kosovo.
We do not expect Serbia to recognize Kosovo.
But we do expect Belgrade to cooperate with the European Union and other key international actors on Kosovo, and to look for pragmatic solutions that will improve the lives of its people – Serbs and Albanians – and avoid making them victims of political disagreement.
Kosovo recently celebrated one year of independence -- and continues to progress as a multi-ethnic democracy.
This independence, while young, is irreversible, and critically important to this region’s stability – and progress.
The United States is committed to a democratic, multiethnic, independent Kosovo.
And we expect Kosovo to remain committed to powerful protections for all communities and their members, including the Serb community. That commitment is a key to Kosovo’s future.
But this era of progress is not without peril.
As you well know, letting go of the past is a daily struggle – it is tempting to fall back on old patterns and ancient animosities.
Embracing the future is hard work.
It requires persistence, commitment and the recognition that compromise is not a sign of weakness – it is evidence of real strength.
It is that kind of strength that I want to talk about today.
It is that kind of strength that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its leaders must summon if a country that has known so much pain is to make a final leap to peace and prosperity.
A decade and a half ago, war tore this country apart and left at least 100,000 dead… and millions homeless.
The genocide at Srebrenica brought home the unspeakable savagery of that war to the world.
It was a call to conscience.
My country – for too long on the sidelines – could no longer stand by.
With our European partners, through the combined use of NATO’s military power and diplomacy in an American city called Dayton, the war was brought to a halt.
The hard work of building a new Bosnia began.
America takes pride in our commitment to a peaceful, successful, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For nearly 15 years, America has been sending our sons and daughters to you – tens of thousands of troops, diplomats, military and police trainers and experts in a wide range of areas to help your country and its citizens.
With our NATO allies and partners, we have devoted blood, sweat and treasure to ending the horrific violence that engulfed your country and to helping you recover and rebuild in peace.
Americans feel that we have a stake in your success.
We feel that we have earned the right to speak honestly, even bluntly, in a country that captured our hearts.
Today, we are worried about the direction your country, your future, and your children’s future are taking.
For three years, we have seen a sharp and dangerous rise in nationalist rhetoric designed to play on people’s fears, to stir up anger and resentment.
We have seen state institutions – which must be strengthened for Bosnia to meet the challenges of the 21st century and to advance toward EU and NATO membership – openly challenged and deliberately undermined.
We have witnessed attempts to roll back the reforms of the last decade -- the very reforms that prompted EU and NATO to open their doors to the citizens of this country.
We have heard voices speaking the language of maximalism and absolutism that destroys states -- not the language of compromise and cooperation that builds them.
The results are predictable – deepening mistrust between communities, deadlock on reforms, and dangerous talk about the country’s future that is reminiscent of the tragedies the people of this country have worked so hard to overcome.
This must stop.
Let me be clear: Your only real path to a secure and prosperous future is to join Europe as Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Right now, you’re off that path.
To get back on track, you need to work together across ethnic and party lines so that your country functions like a country –and so that you interact with the rest of the world as a single, sovereign state.
You can do that as a state with two vibrant entities. We’re not telling you how to organize yourselves, so long as you protect the rights of all the peoples of Bosnia.
Any sovereign state requires a few basic things. Here are some examples:
The state needs to control the national army.
It must prevail where there is a conflict between state and local laws.
It requires an electoral process that does not exclude any ethnic group.
The state must have the power to raise revenue.
And it must have the authority to negotiate with the EU and other states and implement its obligations.
You can follow this path to Europe.
Or you can choose an alternative course. But you need to understand the consequences.
At best, you’ll remain among the poorest countries in Europe.
At worst, you’ll descend into ethnic chaos that defined your country for the better part of a decade. And you will be judged harshly by history and your children.
The choice is yours. If you make the right choice, we will stand with you.
Making the right choice means that the leaders of this country must stop the pursuit of narrow ethnic and political interests instead of the national interest. You must resist challenges to your sovereignty or territorial integrity.
You must focus your talent and energy on issues of undisputed interest to all Bosnians – creating jobs, growing the economy, educating your children. You must accept that Bosnia needs checks and balances to protect the interests of all constituent peoples and minorities.
Each of you has a responsibility to exercise your power in a manner that reassures every member of the community. You must examine your conduct within your governing institutions and ask yourselves: are we building trust or feeding fears?
Working across ethnic lines to forge the complicated and sometimes unpopular compromises required for Euro-Atlantic integration is difficult. But it is the only way forward.
And it is a path you have already shown you can travel – on defense reform creating a unified military, on rule-of-law reforms required to pursue justice for all citizens regardless of ethnicity.
And most recently, in March, for the first time, you amended your constitution to resolve questions on the status of the Brcko District. This issue was too hard to resolve at Dayton. Yet you, the elected representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, were able to come together and pass overwhelmingly an amendment enshrining Brcko’s status.
This is the approach – this is the spirit of compromise – that you need to confront Bosnia’s remaining challenges.
Among the most urgent challenges is completing the objectives and conditions established by the Peace Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The new High Representative, Valentin Inzko, is here today. He has the United States’ full support – and now he must have yours.
The United States will stand behind OHR so long as it remains in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we will not agree to its closure until after the agreed reform agenda – the five objectives and two conditions – is completed.
The international community must be satisfied that all levels of government are prepared to fully comply with the Dayton Peace Agreement – and that their leaders are prepared to abandon rhetoric and actions that would threaten or violate the Peace Agreement – before the international community presence and role here can change.
In my view, the children of this country deserve a democratic Bosnia in which all live in peace and cooperation inside Euro-Atlantic institutions. You owe that to them.
Everyone wants the quiet blessings of a normal life for themselves and for their children, one in which they can travel freely throughout this continent, pursue their economic dreams, and live their daily lives as part of a modern, democratic, and tolerant society.
A prosperous, secure, democratic future inside the Trans-Atlantic community is not a guarantee or a gift. It must be built through hard work and compromise.
And it will not happen if you perpetuate the divisions that have plagued Bosnia in the past. History must not be the anvil upon which new hatreds are forged.
Some of your political leaders and many citizens of Bosnia understand this and are already acting on it. Late last year, Sulejman Tihic addressed the Republika Srpska parliament and reassured the citizens of that entity that Bosniaks are prepared to work within the Dayton framework to build a better future for all Bosnia’s citizens.
Many others are working for that better future. With us today are NGOs and members of civil society – Including the Research and Documentation Center; the Center for Civic Initiatives; and CIVITAS – who shore up the foundations of democracy and tolerance.
Here, too, are lawyers and jurists building the rule of law. And journalists, who courageously challenge nationalist myths and expose corruption. Their work is as noble as it is necessary. In the end, we cannot escape history. We cannot forget it.
But neither can we allow the shadows that darkened so much of the end of the last century to stretch into this one. When he was a young child, Hajat Avdovic left Sarajevo as a refugee and came to America. He succeeded in school and sports. His father, Erol, is a journalist who accompanied me here on Air Force 2.
Hajat wrote a wonderful poem about his native Sarajevo. I want to quote from it now:
Mosques, churches and temples once lined
Your beautiful landscape
Sometime ago your bridges connected
Generations of lives, of Muslim, Croat and Serb
Sometime ago, you were more than just a news story
More than just a city, more than just a name
Sometime ago, you were the heart
The heart of a nation
But the cannons rolled in one morning…
And just like that,
Bullet after bullet,
Mortar after mortar,
Bosnian after Bosnian…
In the words of Suada Dilberovic
"Oh please tell me this is not happening in Sarajevo"
But it was,
We all fell
We fell
But,
We never lost
We never lost our city
We never lost our heart
We never lost our native Sarajevo
This is the story that still needs to be told
Yes, this is the story that still needs to be told.
The story of Sarajevo.
The story of Bosnia.
The story of your future.
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
April 29, 2009
Remarks by FLOTUS & Dr. Biden at Food Bank Event. Part 1&2
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the First Lady
_______________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                          April 29, 2009

REMARKS BY THE FIRST LADY AND DR. BIDEN
AT CAPITAL AREA FOOD BANK EVENT WITH CONGRESSIONAL SPOUSES:
PART ONE

Capital Area Food Bank
Washington, D.C.

2:14 P.M. EDT

DR. BIDEN:  Hello, everybody.  This event is really a reflection of Michelle Obama and the administration and all of you. 

You know, this is not something new to Michelle, because when she was in Chicago, she worked with AmeriCorps and she worked with the University of Chicago to set up a volunteer program on a massive scale.  And then when she became our First Lady, she went to -- she worked with YouthBuild, and she went to Miriam's Kitchen, and she also started her own community garden at the White House.  (Applause.)

So I can think of no better way than to celebrate the 100th day than to do a service event.  So the woman who made this all possible is our remarkable First Lady Michelle Obama.  (Applause.) 

MRS. OBAMA:  All right, we've got a goal, a thousand bags, so I'm not going to talk long because we need to get to work.  This is shift number one.  Shift number two is going to come in, and they're going to try and beat shift number one -- (laughter) -- which will never happen, of course.  And when shift number two comes in, we'll say the same thing.  (Laughter.)

But I just want to thank all of you all for being here.  This is -- I think this is a very special day, because I think this is a very special group of people, the spouses of the leadership of Congress coming together.  We're going to have a wonderful lunch tomorrow.  But we talked about this.  I've talked about this with many of you; that each of us in our roles, in our leadership roles, we have an opportunity to shine a bright light on service and the possibility of what service can do.

Today is just an example of how just a few of us -- and it's not just a few of us; this is a really good number of us that have come together.  Over 150 congressional spouses signed up to be involved in this day of service, and that's just amazing.  (Applause.) 

And one of the things that we can illustrate to the rest of the world is that it doesn't take a lot to do something major.  We're going to spend a couple of hours of our time packing up food, and it's going to feed a thousand children over the weekend here in Washington, D.C.  And I know that each and every one of us feels that this is so -- such a small sacrifice to make, that we would do it again and again.  And many of you, I know, are doing this same type of service and much more in your own districts, in your own cities and towns and communities. 

I just think it's important for America to see you all here doing this and for us doing it together, not as Republicans or Democrats or Independents.  There is no ideology; these are just all of us people who care about our country and want to make service a core part of the work that we do.

So I'm grateful to all of you for taking the extra time to come.  Many of you have brought your children, and that's always a wonderful legacy to pass on. 

We're going to do these kind of events continuously, if possible.  When we come together, whether it's for a luncheon or a picnic, whatever we do over the course of the year, we're going to do our best to organize these types of service opportunities, because it gives us a chance to get to know each other outside of sort of the work setting.  And we can give something back to the D.C. community that oftentimes don't get to see us.  And that's important, too.

So I just want to thank you all.  I want to thank the food bank for making this possible.  It's not easy to pull together a service project for 160 people, and we don't ever give them enough time. 

I also want to thank Jill Biden.  You know, she says this is all me.  This is both of us.  This is all of us, quite frankly.  We couldn't do this if you weren't willing to make it happen.

So I just want to thank you guys and make sure that we hit our goal, a thousand bags.  Let's get going.  Thanks again.  And we'll see you tomorrow at lunch.  (Applause.)

END
2:18 P.M. EDT
  THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the First Lady
_______________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                       April 29, 2009

REMARKS BY THE FIRST LADY AND DR. BIDEN
AT CAPITAL AREA FOOD BANK EVENT WITH CONGRESSIONAL SPOUSES:
PART TWO

Capital Area Food Bank
Washington, D.C.
  3:09 P.M. EDT

DR. BIDEN:  Hi, everybody.  Gosh, thanks for being here.  We just did this just now, so now we're going to have another competition.  And this event really is a reflection of Michelle Obama and the administration and all of you. 

You know, Michelle is not new to this.  She's done community service all of her life.  When she was in Chicago she worked with AmeriCorps and at the University of Chicago.  She set up a volunteer program on a massive scale.  And then when she became our First Lady, she helped with Miriam's Kitchen and YouthBuild, and now she has a community garden at the White House. 

So really I can think of no better way to celebrate our 100th day than to be here with everybody with this service project.  And it's all due to Michelle and the wonderful job that she has done.  Our First Lady Michelle.  (Applause.)

MRS. OBAMA:  Yay!  Fired up, ready to go!  Thank you, Jill.  Jill is being modest.  It's not me; it's -- Jill has been a partner in this from the very beginning.  She has been just a true blue supporter in every endeavor, and I am grateful to have her as my partner.

We wouldn't be here without all of you.  This is something that we talked about when we came into the administration.  We've been having lunches, we've been talking, and one thing I said was that it would be great for us to start coming together across party lines, and using our power, our visibility, to get some things done but also to highlight just how simple service can be. 

I -- you know, my background, I've built a career on volunteerism and community service.  It is something that I am passionate about, and I wanted to bring that to the work of the First Lady, into the administration.  And this is just one very important, very visible example of how a group of people can come together and feed thousands of kids, which is what we're doing here today. 

And it's not just coming here together, but, as Lynne mentioned, everyone has food banks in their communities.  Many of you are -- have important, passionate projects.  It doesn't matter what it is.  It's just that we do it and that we support one another in those efforts and that we pull our communities in to this work, that we pull our kids in.  I see that some of us have brought our children, and that's such an important message to send to the next generation:  that even if you're 10, five, seven, I don't care how old, you're never too young, you're never too old to serve.

So I'm grateful to all of you.  This will not be the last time we come together, because I also think what we do when we come together is that we build relationships, we get to know one another outside of a luncheon, we get to share our passions together.  And it just sort of breaks the barriers, if there are any, that exist.

So it is so important that you all have made this commitment.  Over 150 spouses committed to serve today, and that's an incredible number. 

You are the second group.  We had group one in.  And as Lynne mentioned, we had a goal of trying to get to a thousand bags.  We hit our goal in the first group.  (Laughter.)  So now the challenge begins.  And I have to tell you that Paul Pelosi, who was in the first group, said, well, if you talk longer -- (laughter) -- then you'll slow down their progress.  That was Paul.  So you get him when you see him tomorrow.  You make sure that -- (laughter) -- and so that means we're going to work a little harder and surpass the thousand-bag mark.

So thank you all once again.  Thanks for coming.  Thanks for your energy, your spirit.  And I look forward to seeing you all tomorrow at lunch.  So let's get to work.  (Applause.

END
3:13 P.M. EDT
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
April 03, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden at the 21st Annual National Fire and Emergency Services Dinner
THE WHITE HOUSE 
 ___________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                      April 2, 2009 
REMARKS BY THE VICE PRESIDENT
AT THE 21ST ANNUAL
NATIONAL FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES DINNER  
Hilton Washington
Washington, DC 
7:12 P.M. EDT
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, thank you.  (Applause.)  It's an honor to be back with you.  (Applause.)  It's a genuine honor to be back with you.  (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, please -- please sit down.  I'm not used to these standing ovations, I'm a Vice President.  (Laughter.)  Anyone from Delaware in the house?  (Applause.)  I know you all know we Delawareans, we take inordinate pride in our fire service in our state.  And I just want you to know we also take an inordinate amount at how many show up for this dinner.
I want to tell you though, straight up, first thing I asked when I got here, I said, "How many Delawareans here?"  When they told me the number, I said, "Good."  Because had it been less than last year, I really would have been angry, I'll tell you.  (Laughter.)
Warren, thank you for that -- for that introduction, and it's great to be back with all of you, and with so many other friends I have here.  And so many people have become my friends that I've traveled the country with, with the firefighters always beside me
Look, before we get going I want to mention one personal friend who is not here tonight, Hal Bruno.  Hal, I should mention, as you probably know, just celebrated his 80th birthday.  And Hal has been experiencing some health problems.  And I know I speak on behalf of everyone, everyone in this room and everyone who cares so deeply about Hal, that Hal felt as deeply about firefighters as we do him.  Hal, if somehow we can get this to you, we want you to know we wish you good health, and you're in our thoughts and our prayers.  And come next year, because it ain't the same without you being here.  (Applause.)
And there's one other person who is not here tonight.  He resigned from the Senate -- didn't resign, but didn't run again.  He’s one of my closest friends, and he kind of got a kick in the teeth -- he lost his wife, who was his best friend and his closest ally his whole life, Paul Sarbanes.  Paul Sarbanes has been, in all my years in the Senate, there's no one who supported the firefighters as a senator and as a person more strongly than Paul did.  And I want you to keep Paul in prayers.  The memorial service is tomorrow.  But he's going through a difficult time many of you have had to face.
So it's good -- back -- to be back here among so many of my friends.  And when I say "friends," as you know, I don't use the term lightly.  Friends are those who you can count on when you need them most.  And by that definition, every one of you in this room is my friend.  It's not -- it's not -- I'm here -- everybody seemed surprised backstage, you know, "He came this year."  Why wouldn't I come?  Why wouldn't I come?  You've been the most loyal -- (applause) -- decent group of people.  (Applause.)  And I want you to know when I'm not Vice President, and I'm not doing anything, I'll still come, because I want to tell you I owe you.  I owe you.  But not only do I owe you, our nation owes you.
It's an important debt that, in the White House at least, we try to repay every single solitary day.  Every day I go to my office, each and every day when I pick up the paper and read about another lost life, another father of three who courageously is heading in to save an entire building of -- full of families, but tragically leaving his own family behind.
For me, as you know, this debt is personal.  And for me there is only way to repay you.  And that's to equip you properly, and make conditions safer for each and every one of you every day you step into harm's way -- each and every one of you.  I promise you we will not stop until we don't have to read another obituary about a firefighter who has fatally put himself in harm's way -- (applause) -- always for the good of the community; until we won't have to open the newspaper and see how just yesterday, Captain Manny Rivera of Trenton, passed away from a heart attack after rescuing a victim, and having -- in the process leaving five children behind; until we don't have to read about Fire Chief Nolan Ray Schmidt of Hydro, Oklahoma; 37 years old, a volunteer since he was 18 years old -- leaving behind a wife and two daughters, ages four and two.  Look, I know that famous quote that:  Firemen never die, they just burn forever in the hearts of the people whose life they saved.  But I tell you what, I believe it to be true -- but it’s little consolation to the families at the time of the loss.

But, folks, you know, we can do a lot better.  We can do a lot better.  We have to do better.  And I promise you we will do better.  It’s time to do everything -- and I mean everything we can -- to reduce the dangers you face every day.  You think about the dangers we face -- we don’t think nearly enough about the dangers you face.  And to be able to better prepare you for the perils that are part of more than 20 million calls you receive annually -- you folks in this room represent the response to 20 million calls.
Now, look, I know -- I know you can’t make an inherently dangerous profession, an inherently dangerous job totally safe.  I get it.  I get it.  But I know one thing for darn sure:  We can make you a hell of a lot safer than you are today if we do what we have to do.  Folks, we both know why I haven’t and you haven’t stopped reading about those tragedies.  I read a study that you’ve read -- I hope -- conducted by the U.S. Fire Administration, that found that most fire departments are unable to respond to many common emergencies with the existing staffs they have.
I read another report by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, that identified the lack of staffing as the key cause of firefighter fatalities on a fire ground.  Basically it’s pretty to clear to me that the single, greatest reason for the firefighter dying is that there are simply not enough firefighters.  I've read the studies.  But you've lived that reality every time you strap on a helmet and jump on the back of a truck.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends, I promise you this:  This is about to change.  This is about to change.  (Applause.)
You heard the quote -- you've heard the quote by a mutual friend of a lot of ours in this room when he was around, he said, "When a man becomes a fireman, his greatest act of bravery has been accomplished."  You know that was famously stated by the famous New York Fire Chief Ed Croaker.  He went on to say:  What he does after that is all in the line of duty.
Well, there’s truth in that statement, guys -- you all just live it.  I can’t figure out what makes you all tick, but thank God you tick the way you do.  You should talk about, it’s in the line of duty.  You know, I want you to know our administration recognizes that you’ve all acted bravely just by becoming firemen.  And now we owe it to you to make sure that all you do after that in your line of work is as safe as it can possibly be.
So I pledge to you tonight we’re going to make it happen.  We’ll do -- we’ll do a lot.  But we’ll do it both through better equipment and more firefighters to put the equipment to use.  One alone isn’t enough.  One alone is not enough.  We’ve already increased funding for stations and equipment, better training, more protective clothing, including $210 million in the Recovery Act.  Now, I get blamed for that -- but guess what?  I'm happy to take credit for that.  (Applause.)   Because let me tell you, that $210 million is not enough, it’s not part of this extra, beyond the budget -- this is in the Recovery Act.  And we’re committed to reauthorizing and increasing funding for SAFER,* which will go directly to fire departments -- you can hire more trained and professional firefighters; you're all professionals in this room.
You know, my volunteers are having trouble, it’s getting harder and harder.  The same ethic doesn’t apply.  People have 15 different jobs.  We need some help.  We’ve got to retain firefighters in the danger of being laid off and we’ve got to provide an environment where more people are willing to continue to do what so many of you volunteers have done your whole life.
The truth is, as you commit to saving the lives of endangered Americans, we have to do everything we can to save your lives.  Even as we continue to face economic turmoil, we still have to remain committed to America’s bravest domestic defenders.  And that's what you are -- you're so underestimated.  You're so underestimated.  You're not very good at blowing your own horn.  The truth of the matter is you are the bravest defenders we have.  Quite simply, our nation and our communities count on you, and it’s about time you can count on us.  And I promise you, you’ll be able to count on this administration.  Judge us by our deeds when these four years are over.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's not just a puffed-up platitude.  This is your new government taking bolder action that the community of firefighters needs to make sure you’re as strong as possible.  Again, I’ll go back to the thesis.  We always talk about what it takes to make the public safer, and obviously that's the goal.  But we don't spend nearly as much time of how we make it safer for you to make it safe for the public.  Because I want to tell you straight up, and you don't talk about it this way:  When your community, when the community of firefighters is stronger, when you have more of what you need, when you have sufficient personnel, our communities are stronger.  And that's somehow, sometimes the missing link here.  People don't quite see it that way.  When you're safer, we're all safer.
I once read that all men are created equal; then a few became firefighters.  (Laughter.)  Well ladies and gentlemen, there's a whole lot of truth to that.  (Applause.)  Look, I know you guys.  You guys jump off the apparatus after a fire, take off your equipment, jump in a car, and bust your rear end to get to the Little League field to go line it before the game.  You show up because you don't want to miss your daughter's soccer team's game that you're the coach of.  You head out into the communities, and you raise money for that veteran who lost his leg and needs a ramp built going up to his house so he can get in and out.
Actually, it seems to me -- it seems to me that you leap from your day jobs and head up doing exactly what we're all supposed to do as citizens.  But the irony is you do it the most of any of us.  You head right out on a mission that makes the rest of us look lazy.  And you succeed every time.  You're at the core of our communities, and it's time we recognized your value more than we have, and recognized your valor.  We recognize your valor in those moments where it's so obvious, like 9/11.  But it's amazing how quickly memory fades.  It's amazing how quickly it fades.
So it's time, on a regular basis -- day in, day out, year in, year out -- you got the respect you deserve.  You guys know how I feel, I know that.  It's too easy -- it'd be too hard for me to hide it, and you've figured it out.  But I want you to know the President recognizes it, too.  He recognizes the sacrifices you made, and he admires what you're doing; he admires your courage.  And he makes the same pledge to you I do:  We will give you the manpower and the equipment you need to protect your brothers and sisters in arms, and to protect your neighborhoods, our neighborhoods from the fierce dangers you battle every single day.  Well, we want to protect you more.
So you just keep doing what you're doing.  Judge us by our actions.  Those of you who know me, you know I don't say things I don't think I can deliver on.  You know that every day -- every day I read something about fire service, or someone losing their life, or some life being saved -- I see the firemen who saved my life, and saved the lives of my children.  Every day I see each and every one of you.  Every time I look at my kids, I see you guys.  I see the embodiment of sacrifice and courage that gave America its backbone right after 9/11.  I see a group of men and women coming together with one goal in mind:  Doing something for their communities, doing something for their neighbors, just simply doing something to make things better.  More than 20 million times a year you guys do that.  And it's time we thanked you for it, not just verbally.  It's time we set in motion and begin to repay the immeasurable debt that not only I owe you, but the entire nation owes you.
Look, you know, you guys have heard me kid a lot, and the Delaware guys know I sort of coined a phrase back in 1972.  I said there are three political parties:  There's the Democrats, Republicans, and firefighters, and I knew which one I need -- (laughter) -- and which one I've had at my back this entire time.  But you know, folks, this is not a political constituency.  You guys aren't a political constituency.  You're liberal/conservative, Democrats/Republicans.
The fact of the matter is, though, you are the men and women who I truly regard as my personal friends, and I'm not alone.  This isn't about politics at all.  It's about a kinship of character, and a commitment to country.  I remain forever indebted to all of you.  I remain forever your friend, and you know I love you all.  As a famous writer once remarked, "I can think of no more stirring a symbol of a man's humanity to man than a fire engine."
And those of us who have been on the receiving end of hearing that fire engine, seeing that ambulance, seeing that rescue vehicle come, it is -- it is the symbol, the symbol of humanity.  You don't come to have to hurt.  You risk your lives -- some of you in circumstances where you've been shot at -- coming.  And you do it for no other reason, no other reason to help somebody.  And most times, you don't even know who in God's name they are, you just do it.
So I thank you on behalf of your government.  I thank you on behalf of, I believe, all the American people, if they knew as much as I knew about you, would even be more generous in their requirements, the need to supply you with what you need.  And I want to thank you for your unyielding humanity.  And some of the guys from Delaware, I know, you don't want to -- humanity is a hard word to associate with them, you know what I mean?  (Laughter.)  But the truth of the matter is, as gruff and tough as you all act, as bad -- as tough -- I better watch myself.  (Laughter and applause.)
I keep forgetting I'm not back at my fire hall.  (Laughter.)  But as rugged and -- (laughter) -- unconcerned as you all try to be, I know something that you know and most Americans don't know, you're all suckers.  (Laughter.)  You all have got big hearts.  And you're all doing this for one reason:  There is nothing, no way -- nothing you do, nothing you do is as big a repayment than when you look in the eyes of that victim; you look in that person you carried out of that fire; you look in that person who Jaws of Life you used to save them.  And just the look in their eyes -- that's what makes you guys tick, that's what makes you guys tick.  And that's why I love you.
So, folks, for all that you do to serve this country so bravely, I want to say on behalf of the President of the United States and myself -- and a grateful nation -- thank you, thank you, thank you.  I love you.  (Applause.)
END                                                                        
7:30 P.M. EDT
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
March 20, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden at the Swearing-in of United States Representative Ron Kirk
THE WHITE HOUSE

 ___________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                March 20, 2009

REMARKS BY THE VICE PRESIDENT
AT THE SWEARING-IN OF
UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE RON KIRK

Room 450
Dwight D. 
12:05 P.M. EDT

THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Hey, folks, how are you?  In the tradition I come from, you go to the power center immediately --that's mom.  (Laughter.)  Congratulations, Mom, and thank you.  Please all sit down -- please all sit down.  Thank you so much for being here. 

I'm flattered you're all here.  And let me start off by saying to you as we gather here today to swear in a new leader, it's worth considering just how important, and what a significant part the mission of the U.S. Trade Representative is in our future.  And it's a big deal.

Ron is going to have the responsibility of working toward opening markets throughout the world to create new opportunities and higher living standards for our families, our farmers, our manufacturers, our workers, our consumers, our businesses.  That old joke they used to tell about Willie Sutton.  They said, "Why do you rob banks?"  He said, "Because that's where the money is."  Why do we need trade?  That's where the customers are.

We start off with a premise:  We have the most talented workers in the world, we have the most talented entrepreneurs in the world, and we need access for those products.  And so if we do this right, we should have --- the mission for everyone in this administration is the same as Ron's, and that is:  How do we raise the standard of living for middle class people?

Everyone -- everyone is seeking to lift us out of these difficult times in this administration and in the Congress.  And it's not just to lift us out, but it's to send us all on our way to a much brighter future.  This administration is about improving lives everywhere, plain and simple.  And the U.S. Trade Representative, that's pretty much his job description in a nutshell, improving the lives everywhere.

In Ron Kirk, we have -- we found a leader who has shown time and again that he is the man for this job.  He's a man who has defied the odds, and continues to defy the odds; a man who can take very complex problems and find necessary, practical solutions everybody understands; a man who can make a real difference in the lives of American families, and create real opportunities for those who need it most.

Ron has blazed a trail everywhere he's gone.  He's the first African American mayor in Dallas.  He's the first African American to hold this critical position.  And he's the first guy who headed up -- was the grand marshal of an Irish event in Dallas where he got the mayor of Cork and the mayor of Belfast to sit down together.  I mean, that warrants a Nobel Prize all by itself.  (Laughter.)  So, Ron, I'm now convinced you can do anything.  As an Irishman, that says a lot to me.

And now he has to blaze a trail beyond our borders.  He has to be -- come up with innovative ways for our trade policies to inspire a new environment of basic fairness -- basic fairness in our trade relationships, and to generate some -- which is going to be one of the cores of whether or not we actually have widespread prosperity here in the United States.  And he's got the ideas I think can help make this happen.

I understand that there is not a trade-off, and I think he understands, there's not a trade-off made between supporting free and fair trade and fighting for American workers.  Not only can we, we have to, do both.  We have to do both.  He understands that trade policy is more than just a series of agreements with other countries.  It means new social accountability where American influence can shape global trends, where fairness becomes the guiding principle everywhere.

So, ladies and gentlemen, quite simply, trade policy is a vital tool -- a vital tool in promoting American interest and ideas around the world; a vital tool in the pursuit of a better life for every American -- and God willing, no good agreement is a good agreement unless both parties prosper -- and hopefully it is good for the rest of the world, as well.

Ron will be engaged in that pursuit day in and day out.  Any of you who know him know he's like a bulldog, he doesn't let anything go.  He doesn't let it go.  You give him a mission, he accomplishes it.  Was he like that when he was a kid, Mom?  All right, okay.  (Laughter.)  Well, he has a multiple role here.  He's got to be an enforcer; he's got to be a collaborator; he's got to be a negotiator.  But most of all, he has to be a leader.  And that's what has been the hallmark of his entire career.

He's going to help create a more stable and sustainable, and I think, vibrant American economy as a consequence of his efforts.  Other than that, his job is a piece of cake, Mom.  (Laughter.)  There's not much else he has to do.

Really, though, look, in these tough times with economies everywhere, everywhere in the world struggling -- there's not one that's not -- nations around the globe are looking for new ideas, looking for American leadership.  With everyone looking for a reason to be hopeful, the United States of America is poised to stand up and once again become the leader the world needs. 

And I know that the President knows -- the President knows that Ron Kirk will be the one that helps light the way for us on trade issues.  So, Mr. U.S. Trade Representative, I'm going to ask you to come forward and take the oath of office before I give you the -- give you the podium. 

(The oath of office is administered.)

END
12:12 P.M. EDT
   
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
 Read the latest blog posts from  sylvania Ave
Share-Worthy
Check out the most popular infographics and videos
Photos
View the photo of the day and other galleries
 Watch behind-the-scenes videos and more
Live Events
Tune in to White House events and statements as they happen
Music & Arts Performances
See the lineup of artists and performers at the White House
FROM THE PRESS OFFICE
 
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
March 10, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden to the North Atlantic Council
THE WHITE HOUSE
 ________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                   March 10, 2009
OPENING REMARKS BY THE VICE PRESIDENT
TO THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL
NATO Headquarters
Brussels, Belgium
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Well, thank you very much, Secretary General, and thank you for the warm welcome. It's a pleasure to meet and greet every one of you.
To the NATO allies represented at this table, my purpose here today is quite straightforward and simple: I came to listen. I realize there may be some questions for our administration, but I primarily came here today to listen.
In January, President Obama ordered a strategic review of U.S. policy in Afghanistan and Pakistan to make sure that our goals were clear and that they are achievable. And as part of that review, at that time the President pledged that we would consult closely with all of you in an attempt to form a -- and forge a common and comprehensive approach. That's why I'm here, straightforward and simple: I came to keep the commitment that the President made within weeks after becoming the President of the United States of America.
What we want to learn is what your countries believe are working, what you think is not working, how we can do a better job in stopping Afghanistan and Pakistan from being a haven for terrorists. And the United States believes that we share a vital security interest in meeting that challenge. Each of our countries has a vital interest in the -- from the point of view of the United States in meeting that challenge.
The deteriorating situation in the region poses a security threat, from our perspective, not just to the United States, but to every single nation around this table. It was from that remote area of the world that al Qaeda plotted 9/11. It was from that very same area that extremists planned virtually every major terrorist attack in Europe since 9/11, including the attacks on London and Madrid.
And if I might add, we had a brief discussion with the Secretary General before I came in -- he was kind enough to host me in his office. I want to make it clear to you, from the perspective of the average United States citizen, an attack, a terrorist attack in Europe is viewed as an attack on us. That is not hyperbole -- that is not hyperbole -- because we understand and we view it as an attack on the West. And we view it as a gateway to further attacks on the United States.
So please understand this is not a U.S.-centric view that only if America is attacked is there a terrorist threat. It was, as I said, from the very same mountains the attacks of 9/11 were planned and the attacks that have taken place thus far in Europe, and -- and -- it is from that area that al Qaeda and the extremist allies are regenerating and conceiving new atrocities aimed at the people around the world -- from Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India, to the United States, Europe, and Australia.
And our responsibility, in my humble opinion, each of our responsibilities, is, first and foremost, to protect our citizens. President Obama and I are deeply committed to NATO. Let's get that straight right from the start. There is no ambivalence on the part of our administration about the value and necessity of a strong, coherent NATO. We know that our Alliance works best when we've listened to each other. I had been a United States senator for 36 years before becoming Vice President. I have made multiple trips to this building. I've observed when we consult, when we genuinely consult, when we internally argue and bang out our differences, we generate the kind of consensus that our political leadership needs to take to our own people to make the case about what we've decided. When we build strategies together, it works.
And once we reach an agreement, when we commit to putting the full measure of our strength into achieving our common goals, then it works. I want to make it clear: We're here to consult; we're here to listen; we're here to come up with a joint common strategy. Once that is arrived at, we, the United States, expect everyone to keep whatever commitments were made in arriving at that joint strategy. It's as simple and as straightforward as that.
Together, I am absolutely confident we can handle not only Afghanistan, but many other crises we'll face in the 21st century. I'm also equally as confident that absent that kind of cohesion, it will be incredibly more difficult for us to meet the common threats we're going to face.
We always use the phrase, gentlemen and ladies, that we have common values, which brings us together. Well, that is literally true. And it's time for us to put it to work. Our administration is committed to doing that.
And again, I want to thank you, Secretary General, for the opportunity to be here. And thank you all for giving me the opportunity to come and hear what's on your minds. Thank you very much.
END
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
March 10, 2009
Transcript of Q&A Session of Press Conference with Vice President Biden and NATO Secretary General
THE WHITE HOUSE
 ___________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                         March 10, 2009
REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN
AND NATO SECRETARY GENERAL JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER
IN JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE
NATO Headquarters
Brussels, Belgium
12:45 P.M. (Local)
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: I'd be happy to take your questions.
Q Thank you, Mr. Vice President. Over the weekend, President Obama opened the door, said that he would possibly talk to and create alliances with moderate Taliban in Afghanistan. How much of a factor meets -- how many moderate Taliban are there, and is it enough to make a difference there? And what kind of concessions would the U.S. consider giving them?
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Well, let me just say -- and to paraphrase Secretary Holbrooke, our Special Envoy, and I agree with his assessment after numerous visits to the region and throughout the country -- 5 percent of the Taliban is incorrigible, not susceptible to anything other than being defeated. Another 25 percent or so are not quite sure, in my view, the intensity of their commitment to the insurgency. And roughly 70 percent are involved because of the money, because of them being -- getting paid.
To state the obvious, as you know, the Taliban, most of whom are Pashtun -- you have 60 percent of the Pashtun population in Pakistan; only 40 percent live in Afghanistan. The objectives that flow from Kandahar may be different than Quetta, may be different than the FATA. So it's worth exploring.
The idea of what concessions would be made is well beyond the scope of my being able to answer, except to say that whatever is initiated will have to be ultimately initiated by the Afghan government, and will have to be such that it would not undermine a legitimate Afghan government. But I do think it is worth engaging and determining whether or not there are those who are willing to participate in a secure and stable Afghan state.
Q To continue on this same subject, what kind of negotiation could we have with moderate Talibans? And is the British experience on this matter useful for NATO and for you? And then, Mr. -- President Obama said this weekend also that we're not winning the war in Afghanistan. I would like to have your analysis on this.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Well, I think the President is accurate; we are not now winning the war, but the war is far from lost -- number one. Number two, with regard to the experience, it is different, but not wholly different. We engaged in Iraq the most extreme elements of the Sunni resistance in Anbar Province. We ended up with an operation called the Sons of Iraq, because we accurately determined, as some of us had pointed out in numerous visits there, that the idea that every Sunni was a supporter of -- every Sunni insurgent was a supporter of al Qaeda was simply not true -- simply not true.
The same principle pertains here. Whether or not it will bear as much fruit remains to be seen. There's only one way, and that is to engage -- engage in the process, looking for pragmatic solutions to accomplishing what our goal is; that is an Afghanistan that is, at minimum goal, is not a haven for terror and is able to sustain itself on its own and provide its own security.
Q Mr. Biden, when we speak about Afghanistan, I wanted to ask you what do you plan for Kosovo? For example, how do you assess the security situation there? And do you plan withdrawing some troops and relocating them, these troops, in Afghanistan when you need them more? And I'm sorry, but I'm using also this opportunity to ask you how do you assess the developments in Kosovo since independence? Are you expecting some recognition from member countries of NATO? Thank you.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Thank you for all three questions. (Laughter.) No, we do not believe we need to withdraw or make a judgment relative to Afghanistan based on progress or lack thereof in Kosovo. Number two, there is more to be done in Kosovo. The business is not finished. Number three, it is primarily the responsibility of the European Union and the European Community to follow through on the commitments that we have made. But on balance, I want to make it clear that there is not a tradeoff in terms of our concern for Kosovo and the progress in Kosovo and what need be done in Iraq.
Q On another subject relating to the summit next month, do you expect that the Alliance will decide at that summit who the next Secretary General will be? And could you give us some sense of the U.S. thinking in this debate? Would you like to see, as is traditional, another Western European? Is it perhaps time for an Eastern European, or as a widely read American newspaper columnist said on the weekend, would the U.S. like to see a Canadian?
And if I could ask the Secretary General, realizing that you're not part of the search process, to give your thoughts on how this process is going.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: The Secretary General has decided to stay. (Laughter.) That was a joke. (Laughter.) That was a joke. Look, let me say that the United States has not made a decision yet. This is a consensus matter, it is a consultative matter. We believe there are -- it's a very strong field. We don't think as a matter of policy any -- any member nation should be ruled out as being able to provide a Secretary General, but we have not taken a position on who should be that successor of the Secretary General I'm standing next to. And, yes, I do believe that decision will be made, and hopefully will be made by that time.
And I'm sure the Secretary General hopes that to be the case, too. (Laughter.)
SECRETARY GENERAL JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER: I do indeed, Mr. Vice President. (Laughter.) Otherwise I would have to change plans, which I do not intend to do. But as the Vice President was saying, that is, of course, a decision which needs consensus and which will be taken by the allies at the appropriate time.
If I could hear your question to me through the -- all the tricks of the camera -- it was about the surge in Afghanistan? Is that correct? Would you otherwise repeat it, because I had difficulty in hearing it?
Q No, I just wondered, since you're not part of the process of finding your own successor, if you could, nonetheless, give us your thoughts on the essential qualities that the Alliance should be looking for.
SECRETARY GENERAL JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER: No, no, no, yes. I can give those thoughts, but I will do that in the privacy of my own office or my own house, but certainly not to you and your highly respected colleagues -- since I'm not part of the process. Many qualities; it goes without saying, many qualities.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Well, thank you all very much. Appreciate your time.
SECRETARY GENERAL JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER: Thank you.
END
12:55 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
  
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
March 10, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden at Press Conference with NATO Secretary General
THE WHITE HOUSE

 ________________________________________________________________

For Immediate Release                                                         March 10, 2009

Remarks by Vice President Biden at Press Conference with NATO Secretary General

NATO Headquarters
Brussels, Belgium


12:38 P.M. (Local)

VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Thank you very much, Secretary General. I want to thank all the members for the warm welcome they've afforded me. And thank you for your leadership of the Alliance.

Less than a month from today, NATO is going to meet to celebrate the 60th anniversary of NATO. There's a great deal to celebrate, but there's also a great deal left to do. The Alliance has been the cornerstone of our security since the end of World War II. And to state the obvious, it has anchored the United States in Europe. And I believe it's been helpful in forging a Europe whole and free. There's much to celebrate, as I said, but there's also much to do.

Our community of democratic nations faces extraordinary challenges: a worldwide economic crisis, the likes of which we haven't seen; the spread of mass destruction weapons and dangerous diseases; the growing gap between the rich and the poor; ethnic animosities and failed states; a rapidly warming planet and uncertain supplies of water, energy, and food; and the challenge to freedom and security from radical fundamentalism. And nowhere is that challenge more acute than in Afghanistan.

I know the people of Europe, like the people of my country, are tired of war, and they are tired of this war. But many of our citizens both here in Europe and at home question why we need to send troops and treasure so far from our homes. But we know, we know that it was from the space that joins Afghanistan and Pakistan that the attacks of 9/11 occurred. We know that it was from the very same area that extremists planned virtually every major terrorist attack on Europe since 9/11, and the attack on Mumbai. We know that it was from this same area that al Qaeda and its extremist allies are regenerating and conceiving new atrocities to visit upon us.

As leaders entrusted with the security of our citizens, none of us -- none of us -- none of us can deny that the new threats of the 21st century must be dealt with. None of us can escape the responsibility to meet these threats.

And that's why President Obama ordered a full-scale strategic review of our policy with regard to Afghanistan and Pakistan. He insisted that we consult with our allies and partners so that we produce a truly common vision of how to proceed. And that's what I had the privilege to do today at the North Atlantic Council.

I heard from our allies. I heard the concerns and they listed their priorities. And I pledged to them, as I pledge to all Europeans now, that we will build their ideas into our review, which we expect to present to President Obama before the end of this month, in preparation of the NATO summit in April.

I also shared with my colleagues some of the factors that are shaping our thinking right now, including the requirement that we set clear goals and achievable goals: We need to look at Afghanistan and Pakistan together, because success in one requires progress in the other; the imperative of a comprehensive approach with a strong civilian and diplomatic effort is necessary because we know there is no purely military solution to either Afghanistan or Pakistan; the centrality of building up Afghan security forces -- because our goal is not to stay in Afghanistan, it's to be able to leave, and to leave behind Afghan forces that can provide for the security and safety of the people of Afghanistan; and the need to ensure the security and legitimacy in this year's presidential elections.

In each of these areas, NATO and it member countries plays a critical role. So does the European Union. The Secretary General and I will meet with that leadership after this press conference. And I look forward to hearing from representatives of non-NATO countries, as well, who are doing so much in Afghanistan.

So we had a very good meeting. There was an incredible amount of consensus around the table. Each member country spoke, including two of the aspirant nations. And I came away with a much clearer sense of what our NATO friends would like us to consider in this review.

I might add this is not the end of the consultation; this is essentially the beginning of it. Each of the member countries is going to submit in more detail their concerns, their recommendations and their observations. They all will be taken into consideration -- because I know from my significant experience in this building -- over 37 years -- that we only succeed when, in fact, there is a real consensus. There's a need for a real consensus as it relates to Afghanistan.

END 12:45 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
February 25, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden, Director Orzag and Chairman Devaney at the First Recovery Plan Implementation Meeting
THE WHITE HOUSE
 ________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  February 25, 2009
9:42 A.M. EST
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thanks for being here.  I know each one of the Cabinet members here has urgent business to attend to, but we're meeting here today because the passage of the recovery act is just really the first step.  We have to actually get this money out the door.  We've got to make sure that we're able to answer this economic crisis.  And in order to do that, we've got to do something that's somewhat unprecedented.
And that is -- and we got to follow the money here in a way that we -- it's working exactly like we intended it to.  How far and fast we travel on this road to recovery is going to depend a lot at the front of this -- this is only one of three pieces the President laid out last night.  The recovery act is not going to solve our problem.  But if we don't -- if we don't get this moving and get it moving well, it's going to impede the ability of the Secretary of Treasury and the Director of OMB to do the two pieces they're putting together, which are major chunks of the overall recovery the President talked about last night.
Already this week we've announced that 95 percent of Americans are going to see their paychecks go up because the withholding taxes are going to fall.  And that will be no later than April 1st.  And we've already announced that the first tranche of recovery money is being given to the states.  Just 10 days after the bill was signed, $15 billion to help health care for children and seniors and the needy is already on the way.
And today, the Department of Housing and Urban Development is taking the first step to awarding $10 billion to state and local governments to fund and create jobs through projects making public housing more energy efficient, making improvements in affordable housing; and also, making sure that we actually begin to fund the lead-based paint removal program -- all of which are going to not only increase the public health but -- and energy efficiency -- but they're going to create jobs.  And next week, we'll have more announcements about the next step in getting our investments out the door and putting them to work creating jobs and beginning to grow this economy.
But the purpose of today's meeting is the day after -- hours after the President made his Joint Session speech -- is to discuss the next steps -- precisely how are we, the Cabinet members, going to be able to implement this legislation.  From my consultation with some of you -- and I've gotten a chance to meet with almost all of you directly and individually already -- is that there's an awful lot of conversations taking place between our staffs in the preparation to making sure this money is spent both quickly but efficiently.
So today's purpose -- you not only want to hear me talking to you -- how you're going to go about this.  And we're going to do this once a week, as we kick this thing off, to make sure we know exactly what we're doing. 
Again, this has never been done before.  We've never been in a position where this much money with this much need with this much urgency is available, and the need for us to follow the money in ways we haven't done before.  And this is the first step.  We've got to go through the same process, as you all know, with the governors and with the mayors and with all the recipients of these funds. 
In the last week, President Obama and I have met with many of our nation's governors and many of the mayors, and we reminded them all what this Economic Recovery Act is about:  It's about making a difference in people's lives.  It's about giving people who are out of work or at the risk of losing their job or risk of losing their health care, to help them get through some tough times.  And it's about breaking ground for projects that have been long neglected or have been long needed -- roads, bridges, dams, levees.
It's about putting money into our schools.  And it's about investing in health care technology.  It's about making a real commitment to renewable energy, energy efficiency, stronger energy infrastructure, in the name of not only creating jobs, but also laying the foundation for a 21st century energy policy that frees us from dependence upon oligarchs of oil out there. 
But above all -- above all, it's about creating and saving jobs now.  And so I look forward to working with all of you, and -- both individually and collectively -- and with what's going to be an accountability board.  They said last night, don't mess with Joe.  Well, this is the guy to don't mess with.  (Laughter.)
I want to hear -- and as we go along -- all kidding aside, the purpose of this -- I'm going to be a bit of a pain in the neck.  I know you've got a thousand other things to do in your agencies.  But we're going to have -- we're going to do this weekly.  We're going to make sure that I know -- you've got to let me know what roadblocks you encounter.  You've got to let me know any way that, through the Vice President's office, I can clear the way of some of the bureaucratic structures you're running into; also, if you're running into any headwind when you get out there in the states, you get out there in the cities.  This is just a different deal. 
Governor, I know you've done this as a governor.  Those of you -- Janet Napolitano is a governor, as well -- you're used to doing a lot of this.  We're going to be looking to you to figure out how we actually break the logjam of some of this. 
What I don't want to have -- we're going to have a web site up there -- I don't want to hear that we've sent money out to renovate a school in a particular city, in a particular state -- it will be up there.  All the press will see it on the web site.  The neighbors and the community will see it.  What I don't want to see, Peter -- I don't want to get a phone calling saying, it's been sitting there and nothing has happened for three weeks; now it's five weeks; then it's seven weeks.  Well, I see two trucks there, but I don't see anything happening. 
We have got to make sure that we hold as many people accountable, not in a draconian way, but to actually get this done.  And up to now, you've never had to -- we've never had to sort of follow the dollar -- follow the dollar beyond where we ordinarily -- other than meeting the criteria, does the state, the county, and the city qualify for it; we cut the check.  Well, we're going to be more intrusive than that on cutting the check.
And so every person that any federal dollar flows through has a responsibility to see it's used well.  And so it's the fact that millions of Americans are struggling just to get by, that this should be an incentive to ensure that the money we spend is spent well. 
And I told the governors -- and maybe it's because I'm a little too blunt -- but I told the governors and told the mayors -- who I think have the best intentions in the world; they know how badly it's needed -- Republican governors and Democratic governors -- but we may sometimes not have the legal authority once we cut the check to do much about it.  But I'll tell you what, the moral disapprobation of this office will be used if the money is not being out there spent.  I'm going to go on television and say, we gave so-and-so X amount of dollars and nothing is happening -- why hasn't it happened? 
I mean, this is -- this is -- as I said, we've never done this before.  So the President has appointed one of our toughest Inspector Generals.  I'll not go into Earl's background, but all of you around this table know him.  He's a no-nonsense guy.  And he's going to be helping me and Peter and all of us here follow the money to ensure that it's actually -- it's actually getting out there and working. 
So I'm pleased to be working with two people who are way ahead on this already.  And I don't know how this guy finds any time to do anything.  I tell him, he's got the most wonderful job in the administration, handling the budget.
But what I'm going to do now is turn this over to Peter.  I know that the Secretary of Treasury has to go in to see the President right now.  Peter is going to have to go in, too.  But, Peter, I yield to you for some remarks.  And then I'm going to yield, if I can, to Earl.  And then we'll get down to business.
DIRECTOR ORSZAG:  Well, thank you, Mr. Vice President.  I think I just want to emphasize two aspects of the undertaking that we're facing.  If we are to achieve the President's goal of creating or saving 3.5 million jobs through this legislation, we need to make sure the money gets out quickly, and also wisely.
And the first principle of getting the money out the door quickly -- you've already spoken about the fact that the first tranche of the relief to states for Medicaid expenses will be made available through the Department of HHS today.  Over the next couple weeks, you will also money becoming available in food stamps, unemployment insurance, low-income housing tax credits, law enforcement grants, transportation funding and a variety of other areas.
I saw the governors over the weekend, and I made it clear to them that we will work with them to expedite, provide clear guidance quickly in terms of getting the money out the door, but that, in exchange, we need them to be clear that they're not to park the money in rainy-day funds, which would undermine the purpose of the act and not add to aggregate demand.  And they should not use this funding to pay for projects that are basically already done, unless it's very clear the project had absolutely stopped and would not proceed without this money.
The second part of what we need to do, though, is we need to make sure the money is spent very wisely, and that will speak to the accountability and transparency.  We are asking the taxpayers for their help in getting the economy out of this recession, and in exchange they deserve accountability and transparency.
We've already stood up a web site, recovery.gov, which I'm told is receiving 3,000 hits a second, which I think underscores the interest in the accountability and transparency surrounding this endeavor.
OMB has also published detailed guidance to all of the agencies, including everyone here, about how to implement the recovery act in a transparent -- in a transparent manner.  We have to go beyond normal procedures to a higher level of transparency.
In addition to additional reporting, which all of you have already received guidance on, I would identify the need for sufficient numbers of acquisition and contract officers to oversee the money flowing through the system, to make sure that it is well spent.
So in conclusion, I just would underscore I look forward to working with you and Mr. Devaney and others to make sure we get the money out the door quickly, but also that the money is spent wisely so that we get as much bang for the buck as we can from this historic undertaking.
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Thanks. 
Earl.
MR. DEVANEY:  Mr. Vice President, thank you very much.  As you know, I've been on the job two days, and I've managed to read the recovery act and all of Peter's OMB guidance, and it's a monument task ahead.
I would say that the two goals, if you will, of the accountability board, as Peter mentioned, a big piece of this is the recovery.gov web site.  OMB has gotten that up and running, and I think I'll be at some point taking that over and trying to build that into what it's intended to be.  It's an historic web site that will allow transparency that we've never seen before.  And the goal -- my goal will be for the average citizen to be able to go on that web site and follow the money.
And in large part I think I'll be hearing a lot from citizens, as you mentioned, if they see things that they don't like, and hopefully we'll get some attention to misuse of any of this money.
The second piece of this is to prevent fraud and waste.  And I carefully use the word "prevent" because I think in -- if we were going to do this business as usual, IGs would be detecting fraud and waste, as opposed to preventing fraud and waste.  I was encouraged last week to attend a meeting of the all of the IGs that have stimulus money in their departments, and was delighted to see that everybody seems to be focusing on trying to prevent waste and fraud, as opposed to just simply detecting it and doing investigations and audits.
So I'm sure those will happen, but on the front end of that pipeline, IG is standing there alongside of the departments.  Preventing that waste is I think the way to go and that's what I'm going to be encouraging all the IGs on the board to do.
There are some challenges.  I'll just name one.  Peter mentioned the lack of resources in procurement work.  Pre-9/11 we had about $200 million -- $220 million worth of contracts per year government-wide, and now we have over $500 billion.  And at the same -- during the same amount of time the procurement staffs have not risen in the departments; they've stayed the same.  So that will be a major challenge for all of the Secretaries to address, to make sure that the staff is available to make this happen quickly and to monitor it once it goes out.
So I'm excited about the opportunity.  I know the IGs that are on this board are looking forward to participating and I'm encouraged by the fact that it's -- everybody is treating this -- and my observation is the departments are, as well -- as not business as usual and something that we're going to bring unique talents to that we haven't perhaps done in the past.
THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Look, let me conclude, because I know you've got to -- I know you have to go, and then we can get into some detail here.
One of the primary roles that I am to play in overseeing this is to be the vehicle for you to let know what you need:  What is it that you need in order to be able to get this job done; if you need to take it the President and me then to go from there to get you what you need to be able to do the job.
For example, procurement officers -- it's going to be a problem; many of you do not have your second-level staff folks, you know, the second tier helping you to move the process up on the Hill.  And so I'm going to be asking once a week for a report.  There's already one -- Peter, I'm going to ask you to get a report to me from each of your departments once a week, what you did last week, what you plan on doing this week, what it's going to look like next week, what help do you need, where's the shortfall -- just literally, literally a week-to-week update on the progress and your needs, as well as the progress you're making.
And, you know, we've encouraged and Peter has gone out there, and we all have, talking about -- and each of the states will essentially appoint their own IG, their own person who is going to be responsible for all this money coming through.  I'm going to be inviting all 50 of those people here to Washington in the next couple weeks, when they're saddled up, and to sit down, and with the help of these two men, sit there and go through with those 50, essentially, counterparts to us in each of the states.  We want to know what they're doing, how it administrates with us and how we can help them.
This is a monumental project, but I think it's doable.  As you said, we got to stay on top of it and we got to stay on top of it on a weekly basis, because this is about getting this out and spent in 18 months to create 3.5 million jobs and to set -- tee this up so the rest of the good work that's being done here literally drop-kicks us out of this recession and we begin to grow again -- begin to grow again.
So let's -- I thank the press for being here.  We're going to get down to some of the nitty-gritty as to how we're going to proceed, and thank you all for coming in.  And you'll be reporting here regularly.
                                                       END                                                9:57 A.M. EST
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov 
 
 
 
ISSUES
THE ADMINISTRATION
 
 
Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The White House
February 07, 2009
Remarks by Vice President Biden at 45th Munich Conference on Security Policy
THE WHITE HOUSE

 ______________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  February 7, 2009


REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN AT 45TH MUNICH CONFERENCE ON SECURITY POLICY

Hotel Bayerischer Hof
Munich, Germany

12:49 P.M. (Local)


VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN: Mr. Ambassador, thank you very much. Ladies and gentleman, it's an honor to be back in Munich. I've attended this conference many times as a United States senator, and three of my congressional colleagues are here with me today. But I am honored to be back here, as well, as the Vice President of the United States, representing a new administration and, hopefully, a new day.

Today I am especially honored to represent this administration. And we've gone through the oldest of our traditions: that is the peaceful transfer of power. And now, I bring the regrets of two friends who are usually here. But because we are still grappling with legislation relating to our so-called stimulus package to deal with our economic issues -- both Senators John McCain and John Kerry were hoping to join my three House colleagues here today, they are usually here, but they send their regrets.

I come to Europe on behalf of a new administration, and an administration that's determined to set a new tone not only in Washington, but in America's relations around the world. That new tone is rooted in a strong bipartisanship to meet these common challenges. And we recognize that these challenges, the need to meet them, is not an opportunity -- not a luxury, but it's an absolute necessity. While every new beginning is a moment of hope, this moment -- for America and the countries represented in this room -- it is fraught with some considerable concern and peril.

In this moment, our obligation to our fellow citizens is to -- in our view -- put aside the petty and political notion that -- to reject the zero sum mentalities and rigid ideologies, and to listen to and learn from one another, and to work together for a common prosperity and security of all of us assembled in this room. That's what, in our view, this moment demands. And that's what this new administration is determined to do.

For 45 years, this conference has brought together Americans and Europeans -- and, in recent years, leaders from beyond the Transatlantic community -- to think through matters of our physical security. But this year, more than ever before, we know that our physical security and our economic security are indivisible. We are all confronting a serious threat to our economic security that could further spread instability and erode the progress we've made in improving the lives of all our citizens.

In the United States -- like many of you -- we're taking aggressive action to stabilize our financial systems, to jumpstart our economy, and, hopefully, lay a new foundation for growth in the 21st century. Working with the Congress, we'll make strategic investments that create and save we believe 3 to 4 million jobs, and in the process, boost our competitiveness in the long run.

Our plan includes doubling the production of alternative energy over the next three years; computerizing our citizens' medical records to drive down cost; equipping tens of thousands of our schools and colleges with 21st century classrooms, laboratories and libraries; expanding the broadband across America; and investing once again in science, research, technology -- all the things that spur innovation. We're looking -- we're also working to stabilize our financial institutions by injecting considerable amounts of capital, purchasing some assets and guaranteeing others. These remedies are going to have an impact, as you all know, far beyond our shores, just as the measures all of you are taking will be felt beyond your borders, as well.

And because of that, to the greatest extent possible, we're going to have to cooperate to make sure that our actions are complementary, and to do our utmost to combat this global crisis. The United States is trying to do its part. And President Obama looks forward to taking our message to the G20 meeting in London in April.

And even as we grapple with an economic crisis, we're also -- have to contend with a war in Afghanistan now in its eighth year, and a war in Iraq well into its sixth year. And we have to recognize, as mentioned by both the Chancellor and President Sarkozy earlier today, that there are other forces that are shaping this new century: The spread of weapons of mass destruction and dangerous diseases, endemic disease; a growing gap between the rich and poor; ethnic animosity in failed states; and a rapidly warming planet and uncertain supplies of energy, food, water. The challenges to freedom and security from radical fundamentalism must be added to that list, as well.

In meeting these challenges, the United States will be guided by this principle –- and the principle is: There is no conflict between our security and our ideals. We believe they are mutually reinforcing.

The force of arms won our independence, and throughout our history the force of arms has protected our freedom. That will not change. But the very moment we declared our war of independence, at that moment we laid out to the world the values behind our revolution and the conviction that our policies must be informed, as we said at the time, by a "decent respect for the opinions of mankind."

Our Founders understood then, and the United States believes now, that the example of our power must be matched by the power of our example. And that is why our administration rejects a false choice between our safety and our ideals. America will vigorously defend our security and our values, and in doing so we believe we’ll all be more secure.

As hard as we try, I know -- I know -- that we’re likely to fall short of our ideals in the future, just as we have in the past. But I commit to you, this administration will strive every day -- every day -- to honor the values that animate American democracy and, I might add, that bind us to all of you in this room.

America will not torture. We will uphold the rights of those who we bring to justice. And we will close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay.

But tough choices lie ahead. As we seek a lasting framework for our common struggle against extremism, we’ll have to work cooperatively with nations around the world -- and we’ll need your help. We’ll need your help. For example, we will ask others to take responsibility for some of those now in Guantanamo, as we determine to close it. Our security is shared. And so, too, I respectfully suggest, is our responsibility to defend it.

That’s the basis upon which we want to build a new approach to the challenges of this century. America will do more, but America will -- that’s the good news. The bad news is America will ask for more from our partners, as well.

Here’s what we’ll do, and what we hope our partners will consider. First, we’ll work in a partnership whenever we can, and alone only when we must. The threats we face have no respect for borders. No single country, no matter how powerful, can best meet these threats alone. We believe international alliances and organizations do not diminish America's power -- we believe they help advance our collective security, economic interests and our values.

So we’ll engage. We’ll listen. We’ll consult. America needs the world, just as I believe the world needs America. But we say to our friends that the alliances, treaties and international organizations we build must be credible and they must be effective. That requires a common commitment not only to listen and live by the rules, but to enforce the rules when they are, in fact, clearly violated.

Such a bargain is the bargain we seek. Such a bargain can be at the heart of our collective efforts to convince Iran, for example, to forego the development of nuclear weapons. The Iranian people are a great people; the Persian civilization is a great civilization. But Iran has acted in ways that are not conducive to peace in the region or to the prosperity of its own people. Its illicit nuclear program is but one of those manifestations.

Our administration is reviewing our policy toward Iran, but this much is clear: We will be willing to talk. We’ll be willing to talk to Iran and to offer a very clear choice: Continue down the current course and there will be continued pressure and isolation; abandon the illicit nuclear program and your support for terrorism, and there will be meaningful incentives.

Second, we’ll strive to act preventively, not preemptively, to avoid whenever possible, or wherever possible the choice of last resort between the risks of war and the dangers of inaction. We’ll draw upon all the elements of our power -- military and diplomatic, intelligence and law enforcement, economic and cultural -- to stop crises from occurring before they are in front of us. In short, we're going to attempt to recapture the totality of America's strength, starting with diplomacy.

On his second full day in office, President Obama, went to our State Department, where he stressed the centrality of diplomacy in our national security. The commitment can be seen in his appointments, starting with the Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. It can be seen in the President's decision to name two of America's most tenacious diplomats -- Senator George Mitchell and Ambassador Richard Holbrooke -- to contend with two of the world's most urgent and vexing and complex challenges: the need for a secure, just, and lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians, and the imperative of stopping the mountains between Afghanistan and Pakistan from providing a haven for terrorists.

In both these efforts, America seeks your partnership.

Senator Mitchell just completed his first trip to the Middle East. Above all, he went to listen. In the near term, we must consolidate the cease-fire in Gaza by working with Egypt and others to stop smuggling, and developing an international relief and reconstruction effort that strengthens the Palestinian Authority, and not Hamas. Neither of these goals can be accomplished without close collaboration among the United States, Europe, and our Arab partners.

Then, we must lay the foundation for a broader peacemaking effort. In the past -- well, look at it this way -- it's long time passed for us to secure a just, two-state solution. We will work to achieve it. And we'll work to defeat extremists who perpetuate the conflict. And in building on positive elements of the Arab Peace Initiative put forward by Saudi Arabia, we'll work toward a broader regional peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors, and we'll responsibly draw down our forces that are in Iraq in the process.

The United States will continue to work for a stable Afghanistan that's not a haven for terrorists. We look forward -- we look forward to sharing that commitment with the government and the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, and with all of our allies and partners, because a deteriorating situation in the region poses a security threat not just to the United States, but I would suggest somewhat presumptuously, to every one of you assembled in this room.

President Obama has ordered a strategic review of our policy in Afghanistan and Pakistan to make sure that our goals are clear, and that they are achievable. As we undertake that review, we seek ideas and input from you and all of our partners. And we genuinely seek those ideas. I've already had bilateral meetings. I'll have the opportunity to meet with the President of France and others this afternoon. I had an opportunity to meet with the Chancellor this morning. We are sincere in seeking your counsel.

As we undertake this review, there's a lot at stake. The result must be a comprehensive strategy for which we all take responsibility -- that brings together our civilian and military resources, that prevents terrorists a safe haven, that helps the Afghan people develop the capacity to secure their own future. But no strategy for Afghanistan, in my humble opinion, can succeed without Pakistan. We must all strengthen our cooperation with the people and government of Pakistan, help them stabilize their Tribal Areas, promote economic development and opportunity throughout their country. In the case of my government, we feel it's urgent to move from a relationship that was transactional to one that is based upon a long-term relationship.

Thirdly, America will extend a hand to those who, as the President said, will unclench their fist. The United States of America does not believe, our administration does not believe, in a clash of civilizations; there is nothing inevitable about that. We do see a shared struggle against extremism -- and we'll do everything in our collective power to help the forces of tolerance prevail.

In the Muslim world, a small -- and I believe a very small -- number of violent extremists are beyond the call of reason. We will, and we must, defeat them. But hundreds of millions of hearts and minds in the Muslim world share the values we hold dearly. We must reach them. President Obama has made clear that he will seek a new way forward based on mutual interest and mutual respect. It was not an accident that he gave his very first interview as President of the United States to Al Arabiya. That was not an accident.

To meet the challenges of this new century, defense and diplomacy are necessary. But quite frankly, ladies and gentlemen, they are not sufficient. We also need to wield development and democracy, two of the most powerful weapons in our collective arsenals. Poor societies and dysfunctional states, as you know as well as I do, can become breeding grounds for extremism, conflict and disease. Non-democratic nations frustrate the rightful aspirations of their citizens and fuel resentment.

Our administration has set an ambitious goal to increase foreign assistance, to cut extreme poverty in half by 2015, to help eliminate the global educational deficit, and to cancel the debt of the world's poorest countries; to launch a new Green Revolution that produces sustainable supplies of food, and to advance democracy not through the imposition of force from the outside, but by working with moderates in government and civil society to build those institutions that will protect that freedom -– quite frankly, the only thing that will guarantee that freedom.

We also are determined to build a sustainable future for our planet. We are prepared to once again begin to lead by example. America will act aggressively against climate change and in pursuit of energy security with like-minded nations.

Our administration's economic stimulus package, for example, includes long-term investments in renewable energy. And we believe that’s merely a down payment. The President has directed our Environmental Protection Agency to review how we regulate emissions, start a process to raise fuel efficiency, appoint a climate envoy -- and all in his first week in office, to demonstrate his commitment.

As America renews our emphasis on diplomacy, development and democracy, and preserving our planet, we will ask our allies to rethink some of their own approaches -- including their willingness to use force when all else fails.

When it comes to radical groups that use terror as a tool, radical states who harbor extremists, undermine peace and seek or spread weapons of mass destruction, and regimes that systematically kill or ethnically cleanse their own people, we must stand united and use every means at our disposal to end the threat that they pose.

None of us can deny or escape the new threats of the 21st century. Nor can we escape the responsibility to meet them.

And we are not unmindful in the United States how difficult it is to communicate these notions to our public who don’t want to hear much of what needs to be said.

Two months from now, the members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will gather to celebrate the 60th year of this Alliance. This Alliance has been the cornerstone of our common security since the end of World War II. It has anchored the United States in Europe and helped forge a Europe whole and free. Together we made a pact, a pact to safeguard the freedom of our people founded on the principles and the documents referring to democracy, individual liberty, and the rule of law. We made a commitment to cooperate, to consult, to act with resolve when the principles we defended are challenged.

There is much to celebrate. But we there’s much more to be done. We must recommit our shared security and renew NATO, so that its success in the 20th century is matched in the 21st century.

NATO's core purpose remains the collective defense of its members. But faced with new threats, new realities, we need a new resolve to meet them and new capabilities to succeed. Our Alliance must be better equipped to help stop the spread of the world's most dangerous weapons, to tackle terrorism and cyber-security, to expand the writ of energy security, and to act in and out of area more effectively. We continue to develop -- we will continue to develop missile defense to counter the growing Iranian capability, provided the technology is proven and it is cost-effective. We'll do so in consultation with you, our NATO allies, and with Russia.

As we embark on this renewal project -- as we like to think of it -- the United States, like other allies, would warmly welcome, and we do warmly welcome, the decision by France to fully cooperate in NATO structures. That's the main reason the President got our speech. (Laughter.) You were supposed to say nicer things about me when you got the speech, Mr. President. (Laugher.) That's a joke. (Laughter.)

In a recent discussion with President Sarkozy, President Obama underscored his strong support for France's full participation in NATO, should France wish it. France is a founding member of NATO and a major contributor to its operation. We would expect France's new responsibilities to reflect the significance of its contributions throughout NATO's history, and to strengthen the European role within the Alliance.

We also support the further strengthening of European defense, an increased role for the European Union in preserving peace and security, a fundamentally stronger NATO-EU partnership, and a deeper cooperation with countries outside the Alliance who share our common goals and principles.
The United States rejects the notion that NATO's gain is Russia's loss, or that Russia's strength is NATO's weakness. The last few years have seen a dangerous drift in relations between Russia and the members of our Alliance. It is time -- to paraphrase President Obama -- it's time to press the reset button and to revisit the many areas where we can and should be working together with Russia.

Our Russian colleagues long ago warned about the rising threat of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in Afghanistan. Today, NATO and Russia can, and should, cooperate to defeat this common enemy. We can and should cooperate to secure loose nuclear weapons and materials to prevent their spread, to renew the verification procedures in the START Treaty, and then go beyond existing treaties to negotiate deeper cuts in both our arsenals. The United States and Russia have a special obligation to lead the international effort to reduce the number of nuclear weapons in the world.

We will not agree with Russia on everything. For example, the United States will not -- will not recognize Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states. We will not recognize any nation having a sphere of influence. It will remain our view that sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances. But the United States and Russia can disagree and still work together where our interests coincide. And they coincide in many places.

This conference started in the shadow of the Cold War. Now it takes place in a new century with new threats. As one great poet, an Irish poet, once wrote about another circumstance, he said: "All is changed, changed utterly: a terrible beauty has been born." Well, all changed, changed utterly. And we must change, too, while remaining true to the principles upon which this Alliance was founded. And we must have the common courage and commitment of those who came before us to work together, to build together, to stand together. In sharing ideals and searching for partners in a more complex world, America and Europeans still look to one another before they look to anyone else. Our partnership has benefitted us all. It's time -- it's time to renew it. And President Obama and I look forward to doing just that.

Thank you for your indulgence. (Applause.)

END                  1:10 P.M. (Local)
  
  
 Photos
  
 
 
 
  
ISSUES
 Criminal Justice Reform
Cuba
 Civil Rights
Climate Change
Economy
Education
Foreign Policy
Health Care
Iran Deal
Immigration Action
More
Defense
Disabilities
Ethics
Equal Pay
Homeland Security
Reducing Gun Violence
Rural
Service
More
Seniors & Social Security
Taxes
Technology
Trade
Urban and Economic Mobility
Veterans
Women
THE ADMINISTRATION
 President Barack Obama
Vice President Joe Biden
First Lady Michelle Obama
Dr. Jill Biden
  Initiatives
  
  
  Presidents
 The Constitution
 Resources
En Español Accessibility Copyright Information Privacy Policy USA.gov